Title: PILOT: Privileged Imitation Learning for End-to-End Motion Planning of Autonomous UAVs under Partial Observability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.14082v1

Published Time: Mon, 17 Aug 2026 00:35:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# PILOT: Privileged Imitation Learning for End-to-End Motion Planning of Autonomous UAVs under Partial Observability 

Qingrui Zhang Feng Xue Xiang Zhou Chenghao Yu 

School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Sun Yat-sen University (Shenzhen Campus), Shenzhen, China 

Abstract— Autonomous navigation in cluttered environments is hampered by partial observability and dynamic constraints. This paper presents PILOT, a constraint-aware privileged imitation learning framework for vision-based end-to-end UAV motion plan-ning under partial observability. The framework distills planning strategies from a computationally intensive optimal control expert into a student policy regularized toward safety and dynamic requirements via a dual-objective loss function. To mitigate partial observability, a spatiotemporal perception fusion module using a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) is developed to integrate historical depth images and odometry. This module infers task-relevant latent context from historical observations, enhancing spatial awareness beyond the instantaneous FOV without main-taining persistent map memory. A trajectory parameterization layer mapping network outputs to a structured trajectory, while enabling explicit continuity, dynamic-consistency, and obstacle soft penalties during training, encouraging constraint satisfaction for unseen ob-servations without formal guarantees. Simulations on quadrotor and fixed-wing aircraft demonstrate that PILOT achieves performance comparable to the privileged expert while reducing computational overhead by over 80%. Successful indoor and outdoor zero-shot deployment confirms the practical feasibility and cross-domain generalization of the planner. 1.

Index Terms— End-to-End Motion Planning, Privileged Imita-tion Learning, Trajectory Parameterization, Autonomous navigation 

I. INTRODUCTION 

# UNMANNED Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have gained significant attention across diverse industries—including package delivery [1], [2], target tracking [3], [4], and environmental monitoring [5], 

0018-9251 © 2022 IEEE 

> 1

Simulation and experiment videos can be found at https://qr-zhang.github.io/PILOT/. 

[6]—owing to their exceptional maneuverability and versatile capabilities. As mission profiles evolve, autonomous navigation of UAVs must adapt to diverse scenarios. The primary challenge lies in the real-time generation of feasible trajectories under the stringent constraints of limited onboard perception and computation resources. This challenge is amplified in unstructured, cluttered low-altitude environments, where environmental complexity demands higher levels of autonomy [7]. Autonomous flight in such scenarios necessitates aseamless integration of robust obstacle detection and dynamic motion planning [8]–[10]. Vision-based systems are favored for this task due to their lightweight feature and rich 3D perception capabilities [11]–[13]. Conventional vision-based pipelines typically rely on modular architectures—separating perception, localiza-tion, and planning [8], [9]. While transparent, these methods suffer from high integration complexity and cumulative error propagation across modules [8]. They also exhibit limited adaptability to unexpected environ-mental changes or unstructured scenarios. To enhance performance and generality, optimization-based methods are often employed to minimize cost functions subject to environmental and dynamic constraints [9]. However, optimization-based methods are generally computation-ally intensive, a bottleneck that becomes increasingly acute when navigating non-convex obstacles in unstruc-tured environments. Such overhead often precludes their viability for real-time onboard implementation on ag-ile UAVs [14], [15]. Furthermore, optimization-based methods remain modular by design, thus inheriting the issue of compounded error propagation across sequen-tial stages. Independent of these architectural limitations, partial observability remains a persistent challenge for local sensing, as traditional planners frequently lack the spatiotemporal awareness necessary for safe navigation. Consequently, two fundamental research questions arise: 1) Can we develop a unified planner to eliminate the cumulative errors and computational overhead of modular optimization pipelines while maintaining high-performance trajectory generation? 

2) Can UAVs overcome partial observability in clut-tered environments to ensure safe navigation using local, egocentric observations? 

To address these challenges, learning-based planning, specifically Imitation Learning (IL), offers a promising path by shifting the heavy computational burden of opti-mization to an offline training phase [16], [17], where learned policies serve as high-performance surrogates for real-time execution. Unlike Reinforcement Learning (RL), which often fails to converge when processing high-dimensional visual inputs [18], IL provides stable training by leveraging expert demonstrations [19]. To bridge the gap between local sensing and global aware-ness, privileged learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm [20]. By training a “student” policy to mimic a “teacher” that has access to ground-truth environmental 

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX 2022 1arXiv:2608.14082v1 [cs.RO] 14 Aug 2026 data (privileged information) during training, the stu-dent can learn to implicitly reconstruct hidden features from raw sensor histories [21], [22]. However, tradi-tional two-stage privileged learning—where the teacher is first trained via RL—suffers from low sample efficiency and unpredictable expert performance [23]. However, its advantages remain largely unexploited in vision-based autonomous UAV flight. Furthermore, vanilla privileged learning typically involves a two-stage learning process [20], [23]. In the first stage, the teacher policy is learned using an RL algorithm, while in the second stage, the student policy is trained to mimic the teacher. It often requires repeated trial and error, as the performance of the learned teacher policy is not guaranteed and is highly uncertain. Consequently, the two-stage learning process in vanilla privileged suffers from low sample efficiency and Unstable training, resulting in high computational demands and prolonged training times. In this paper, we propose PILOT, a constraint-aware, 

Privileged Imitation Learning algorithm for vision-based end-to-end UAV m OT ion planning in diverse cluttered environments. Unlike traditional two-stage privileged learning [18], [23], PILOT adopts a one-stage learning paradigm, employing an MPC expert with access to full privileged information—including complete vehicle states and precise obstacle locations—to provide high-quality trajectory supervision under the stated model and optimization assumptions. A trajectory parameterization layer is integrated into the End-to-End (E2E) architecture of the learned planner, enabling PILOT to regress control points rather than raw control inputs. This design ensures an improved adherence to UAV dynamic constraints, particularly for fixed-wing UAVs. To address partial ob-servability, a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) [24] is incorporated to implicitly infer latent features from historical visual observations, thereby reconstructing the privileged spatial context necessary for navigation beyond the sensor’s immediate field of view (FOV). The PILOT framework is evaluated via Monte Carlo simulations on both quadrotor and fixed-wing platforms to demonstrate its cross-platform generality. Ablation studies are per-formed to verify the efficacy of both the trajectory pa-rameterization and TCN modules. Sim-to-real transfer is demonstrated through zero-shot deployment on a custom-built quadrotor in both indoor and outdoor settings. The learned policy achieves comparable performance to the privileged expert while reducing computational overhead by more than 80% across various settings.  

> A. Related Works

Vision-based planning is widely explored for its ef-ficiency and flexibility in unstructured, congested en-vironments. Conventional frameworks adopt a modular approach, partitioning tasks into independent perception, prediction, and planning sub-tasks [9], [10], [25], [26]. Though sophisticated methods—including vector field [27], [28], sampling-based [25], and optimization-based designs [10], [29]—have been developed, these methods rely on privileged environmental information. However, assuming full access to privileged data is impractical for real-world integration. Many designs [15], [28]–[30] simplify obstacles as circles with known parameters—an assumption that often fails or leads to overly conserva-tive performance in complex scenes. Furthermore, it is difficult to precisely determine obstacle geometry with onboard perception. While representing environments via discrete cells or voxel grids can mitigate those issues, it significantly increases the computational costs [31], [32]. While vision-based modular methods offer inter-pretability, their extended workflows demand significant expert knowledge and intricate design. This multi-stage pipeline is prone to cumulative errors and latencies re-sulting from sequential, computationally intensive tasks. To address these drawbacks, learning-based methods have emerged as a compelling alternative, providing E2E so-lutions that circumvent the complexities of conventional modular architectures [33]. Existing research employs RL or IL to develop E2E policies [33], [34]. In RL, optimal policies are trained offline via trial and error, which requires an immense volume of samples. Conversely, IL demonstrates superior sample efficiency when processing high-dimensional visual inputs, making it a focal point for contemporary robot learning research [22], [35], [36]. IL enables policies to be learned from expert demon-strations, such as optimization-based planners [37], [38] or human pilots [39], though performance is bounded by the expert’s competence. To transcend this, privileged imitation learning [20] employs a privileged expert to guide a student policy via knowledge distillation. How-ever, direct control action generation [33], [40], [41] lacks motion smoothness, compromising reliability during scene transfer. Alternatively, methods using predefined motion primitives [42], [43] are limited by discrete par-titioning, leading to suboptimal performance. In contrast, our framework mimics a privileged expert based on a set of control points for parameterized trajectories rather than single-step actions. This trajectory parameterization approach provides a structured output to improves motion smoothness with the adherence to dynamic limits. Unlike decoupled approaches, PILOT unifies privi-leged imitation learning, temporal perception encoding, and optimization-based planning around a shared B´ ezier trajectory representation, enabling direct trajectory-level knowledge transfer and a compact policy deployable under partial observability.  

> B. Contributions

First, we propose a constraint-aware privileged imi-tation learning framework for vision-driven autonomous flight. Unlike conventional behavior cloning or two-stage teacher-student paradigms, the framework distills a com-putationally intensive privileged expert into a deployable student policy via a single-stage training objective. By minimizing a dual-objective loss that couples trajectory    

> 2IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX 2022

imitation with constraint-related regularization, the policy promotes adherence to dynamic and safety requirements even in the presence of imitation errors. Second, we propose a spatiotemporal perception fu-sion module to address partial observability in vision-based navigation. Unlike single-frame policies or ex-plicit mapping pipelines, the module leverages a TCN to causally integrate finite histories of depth images and odometry. It enables the planner to infer task-relevant latent context, compensating for limited fields of view while retaining a lightweight representation suitable for real-time onboard inference. Third, we integrate B´ ezier trajectory parameteriza-tion into the end-to-end planner. Rather than predicting pointwise control commands, the network regresses a set of control points used to generate a finite-horizon trajectory. This formulation provides a C2-continuous trajectory representation, enabling direct trajectory-level supervision, analytic evaluation of continuity and dynamic penalties during training, and platform-specific reference extraction without post hoc fitting. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces preliminaries for the algorithm design and formulates the learning-based planning problem. In Sec-tion III, the PILOT framework is presented. Numerical simulations are provided in Section IV, followed by real-world experimental results in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper with summary remarks. 

II. PROBLEM FORMULATION 

In this section, the mathematical foundation is estab-lished by defining the system dynamics and the privileged optimal control problem, followed by a formalization of partial observability inherent in vision-based flight. 

A. System Dynamics 

The proposed PILOT framework is designed to be platform-agnostic, facilitating deployment across hetero-geneous aerial platforms. Hence, a general nonlinear discrete-time model is considered. 

xt+1 = f (xt, ut) (1) where xt ∈ Rnx is the state vector of a UAV at the time step t, ut ∈ Rnu denotes the control input, and f : Rnx ×

Rnu → Rnx represents the general dynamics. Following established literature [7], [28], [44], a UAV is assumed to be equipped with an inner-loop attitude controller, which allows us to focus on translational maneuvers. Accordingly, the state vector is xt = [ p⊤ 

> t

, v⊤ 

> t

]⊤, where 

pt, vt ∈ Rn denote the position and velocity in the inertial frame ( n ∈ { 2, 3}). In this study, acceleration is chosen as the input ut, which is readily transformable into attitude commands—represented via SO (3) or quaternions—to be tracked by the inner-loop autopilot. A UAV operates under state and input constraints such that xt ∈ C x and ut ∈ C u,where Cx and Cu are assumed to be convex. 

B. Privileged Constrained Optimal Control Problem 

One central component of our design is the “privi-leged” expert that provides the supervision signal for the learning process. The privileged state sp ∈ S p is defined as an augmented vector with sp = {x, xenv }, where 

x ∈ Rnx is the UAV’s system state in (1), and xenv is the environmental information, such as global occupancy maps, obstacle locations and geometries. Note that sp

provides an omniscient view of the navigation manifold. The privileged planning task is thus formulated as a receding-horizon Constrained Optimal Control Problem (OCP). At each time step t, the expert policy π∗ generates an optimal control sequence u∗ 

> t:t+H

by solving 

min 

> ut:t+H
> t+H

X

> k=t

ℓ (xk, uk, xg ) (2a) s.t. xk+1 = f (xk, uk), (2b) 

xk ∈ X f ree (sp), (2c) 

xk ∈ C x, uk ∈ C u, (2d) where ℓ is a cost functional penalizing deviation from the goal and control effort. This OCP acts as the framework’s oracle, yielding the optimal state-action pairs that consti-tute the target manifold for training our E2E policy. 

C. Partial Observability 

While the expert policy π∗ operates on the om-niscient privileged state sp, real-world deployment is restricted to a partial observation ot = γ(sp,t ), where 

ot represents a high-dimensional sensor stream, such as a FOV-constrained depth image or a local point cloud. The mapping γ : Sp → O models sensory limitations—including finite range, restricted FOV, and measurement noise—thereby inducing a Partially Ob-servable Markov Decision Process (POMDP). Since an instantaneous observation ot is insufficient to uniquely reconstruct the collision-free space Xfree , we use ot−k:t =

{ot−k+1 , . . . , ot} over a lookback horizon k. Conse-quently, the planning task reduces to learning a param-eterized policy πθ (ot−k:t, xg ) that maps the observation history and goal state xg to the optimal control manifold. The policy πθ must satisfy the following requirements. 

• Collision-free: xt ∈ X f ree (sp), ∀t ∈ [t0, tf ], where 

tf is the total time to achieve the navigation task; 

• Dynamically feasible: xt ∈ C x and ut ∈ C u, ∀t ∈

[t0, tf ];

• Computationally efficient: πθ is suitable for real-time execution on resource-constrained hardware. By leveraging temporal correlations, πθ aims to re-cover the latent environmental features encoded in sp,effectively approximating the expert’s performance un-der sensory and computational constraints. The dynamic feasibility and collision-avoidance criteria defined above specify operational targets rather than formal guarantees. PILOT incorporates soft penalties for velocity, acceler-ation, continuity, and obstacle clearance to encourage  

> AUTHOR ET AL.: SHORT ARTICLE TITLE 3Imitation Loss

Deployment 

𝑼 𝒆,# 

Stage 1 — Dataset Collection Stage 2 — Network Training 

𝑼 𝜽,# 

> MLP
> ... ... ...
> Trajectory Generation Dynamic Feasibility
> Obstacle Avoidance
> Goal Navigation
> Motion Smoothness
> Constraint loss

𝑼 𝜽,#    

> ResNet
> TCN
> Flight Controller
> Goal
> Obstacle Position
> Velocity Sequence
> Goal
> Velocity Sequence Depth Sequence Fig. 1. The proposed PILOT framework. The network policy takes a sequence of depth images, historical measurements of velocities, and the goal state as inputs, while the MPC expert has access to privileged information, e.g. locations of surrounding obstacles.

constraint-consistent trajectories. However, these soft-penalty losses do not guarantee constraint satisfaction for out-of-distribution observations or under perception noise. 

III. PILOT F RAMEWORK 

The PILOT framework enables vision-driven E2E motion planning using a privileged optimization-based expert as the training mentor (Fig. 1). Unlike behavior cloning, PILOT employs a guided learning paradigm with the student policy optimized against a dual-objective that balances expert trajectory imitation with explicit penalties for predicted system constraint violations. 

A. Trajectory Representation and Mapping 

Rather than imitating low-level control commands [18], [23], PILOT distills globally informed planning behaviors into a deployable policy operating under partial onboard observations. To this end, both the privileged expert and the student policy share an identical B´ ezier trajectory representation. The expert generates trajectory control points using full environmental information, while the student learns to predict the same control points from onboard perception. The trajectory parameterization enables the derivation of continuous trajectories from dis-crete control points, endowing the policy with multi-step motion awareness and proactive collision risk assessment. Let U = {P0, P1, . . . , Pm} be a set of m + 1 control points. A B´ ezier curve b(t) is defined as 

b(t) = 

> m

X

> i=0

Pibi,m (t), t ∈ [0 , T ] (3) where T > 0 is the duration of the planning horizon, and 

bi,m (t) are the Bernstein basis polynomials of degree m.

bi,m (t) = 

mi

  

1 − tT

m−i  tT

i

, t ∈ [0 , T ] (4) where  mi

 represents the binomial coefficient. The derivatives of the B´ ezier curve (3) can be ex-pressed using the same set of control points as below. 

˙b(t) = 

> m−1

X

> i=0

mT (Pi+1 − Pi) bi,m −1(t) (5) 

¨b(t) = 

> m−2

X

> i=0

m(m − 1) 

T 2 (Pi+2 − 2Pi+1 + Pi) bi,m −2(t)

(6) This formulation preserves computational efficiency on resource-constrained hardware. Here, the subscript t + h

indicates a predicted quantity h steps ahead of current time t, for h ∈ { 1, . . . , H } with prediction horizon H.Extended trajectories are represented as piecewise B´ ezier curves formed by concatenating M segments. B´ ezier curves possess the convex hull property, en-suring that the curve b(t) lies strictly within the convex hull of its control points U . Because the derivatives in (5) and (6) are themselves B´ ezier curves formed by the forward differences of U , they likewise inherit this prop-erty. In PILOT, representing the finite-horizon trajectory via multiple B´ ezier segments localizes the convex-hull bounds to individual segments, reducing the conservatism of a single B´ ezier curve. While the geometric convex-hull property itself is exact, practical collision avoidance also depends on obstacle representations, local linearization, and slack variables; thus, it is not interpreted as an unconditional safety guarantee. For scenarios requiring topological or route-level decisions (e.g., sharp turns or narrow passages), PILOT functions as a local planner that can be guided by an upper-level planner providing intermediate waypoints, reference paths, or safe corridors. 

B. Expert Policy via Constrained Optimization 

The expert policy is realized through Model Predictive Control (MPC), which serves as the numerical imple-mentation of the Privileged Constrained OCP defined in Section II-B. By adopting the B´ ezier parameterization introduced in Section III-A, the OCP is transformed into    

> 4IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX 2022

a structured Quadratic Programming (QP) problem. 

min  

> Ut,Σt

Jg + Ju + Js (7a) s.t. xt+i|t ∈ C x & ut+i|t ∈ C u (7b) 

xt+i|t ∈ X f ree (sp), ∀i ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , H} (7c) 

Cc (Ut, c) = 0 (7d) 

CΣ (Σt) ≤ 0 (7e) where Ut is the stacked vector of control points defining the trajectory manifold b(t) in (3), and Σt is the vector of slack variables. The terms Jg , Ju, and Js represent the navigation cost, control input penalty, and constraint violation cost, respectively. The subscript t + i|t denotes a predicted value at time t+i given information available at time t, and H defines the total prediction horizon. Finally, 

Cc(Ut, c) and CΣ(Σt) denote the constraint functions for the control points and slack variables. 

1. Cost Function formulation 

The objective function (7a) is designed to balance navigation efficiency, motion smoothness, and constraint feasibility. To ensure flight convergence toward the target, the navigation cost Jg is defined as the cumulative squared Euclidean distance between the predicted positions pt+i|t

and the goal position pg , so 

Jg =

> H

X

> i=1

λg pt+i|t − pg 

> 22

(8) where ∥·∥ 2 denotes the Eucildean norm, and λg > 0 is the associated weighting scalar. To penalize aggressive maneuvers and encourage tra-jectory smoothness, the control cost Ju is defined as 

Ju =

> H

X

> i=1

(λu ut+i|t

> 22

) (9) where λu > 0 is the penalty weight for the control effort. Furthermore, the constraint violation cost Js handles obstacle avoidance while maintaining numerical stability. Introducing slack variables Σt = [ σ⊤

> t+1 |t

, . . . , σ⊤

> t+H|t

]⊤ ∈

RNpH , with Np denoting obstacle-surface points within the privileged perception range, relaxes collision con-straints into soft penalties. This relaxation enhances nu-merical feasibility near clearance boundaries or in clut-tered spaces. However, since positive slack values reduce clearance margins, QP feasibility alone does not certify a collision-free path. The constraint penalty is 

Js =

> H

X

> i=1

(λs, 11⊤ 

> Np

σt+i|t + λs, 2 σt+i|t

> 22

) (10) where λs, 1 > 0 and λs, 2 > 0 are constant weights, and 

1Np ∈ RNp is a column vector of ones. This formulation provides the optimizer greater flexibility while penalizing the magnitude of nominal-clearance violations. 

2. Constraint Mapping via Convex Hull 

State and control constraints in (7b) restrict the tra-jectory to the UAV’s physical limits, given by Cx = {x ∈

Rn | x ≤ x ≤ x} and Cu = {u ∈ Rn | u ≤ u ≤ u}. By the convex hull property of B´ ezier curves (Section III-A), these constraints translate into bounded inequalities on the control points. 

ud ≤ AdUt ≤ ud (11) where Ad is a constraint matrix mapping the stacked control points to the corresponding derivatives. To enforce C2 continuity across the junctions of 

M concatenated B´ ezier segments, the equality constraint 

Cc(Ut, c) = 0 is formulated as 

Cc (Ut, c) = AcUt − c = 0 (12) where Ac encodes boundary conditions linking final con-trol points of segment j to initial points of segment j + 1 .

3. Privileged Obstacle Avoidance 

To facilitate collision avoidance in cluttered environ-ments, the MPC expert maintains a nominal clearance from obstacles. Privileged obstacle information is repre-sented by a dense point cloud Po = {po,j }Np 

> j=1

sampled across occupied surfaces within the perception range. This point-cloud representation unifies diverse geome-tries—sampling lateral/end surfaces of upright and rigidly transformed tilted cylinders, exterior faces of cuboids, and frame surfaces of gate obstacles to preserve free openings. The collision-avoidance condition is thus given by 

pt+i|t − po,j 2 ≥ ds − σt+i|t,j , ∀j ∈ { 1, . . . , N p} (13) where po,j is the j-th obstacle-surface point, ds is the re-quired clearance incorporating vehicle safety margins, Np

is the count of evaluated surface points in the privileged range, and σt+i|t,j is the slack variable. This point-cloud representation provides a discrete surface approximation whose resolution depends on the sampling interval. For efficient online implementation, the nonlinear con-straint (13) is linearized via a first-order Taylor expansion, yielding the following linear inequality. 

As[U ⊤ 

> t

, Σ⊤ 

> t

]⊤ ≤ us (14) where As is a constant matrix and us is an upper bound vector. They are constructed from the privileged obstacle-surface point cloud Po in (13). The slack variables satisfy non-negativity constraints, so CΣ (Σt) is given by 

CΣ (Σt) = −Σt ≤ 0 (15) The QP problem (7) is solved via OSQP [45], generating optimal control points Ue,t for the E2E planner to mimic. 

C. Temporal Encoding for Latent State Inference 

The E2E trajectory planner maps high-dimensional visual observations and platform dynamics into feasible trajectories by imitating expert decision-making. As illus-trated in Fig. 1, the architecture comprises three primary components: an image processing module for spatial  

> AUTHOR ET AL.: SHORT ARTICLE TITLE 5

feature extraction, a spatio-temporal fusion module for se-quential dependency modeling, and a trajectory planning module for control point generation. Due to the limited FOV of the onboard camera, a UAV operates under partial observability, making an instantaneous observation ot

insufficient to capture the complete environment state. To address this limitation, the architecture employs temporal encoding to infer a latent state from historical context. To extract structural cues from raw depth data, a ResNet-18 backbone [46] is used, which processes a sequence of depth images ot−k:t with k denoting the look-back window. Each residual building block is defined by 

y = fN N (z, W1, W2) + z (16) where z and y are the block input and output, respectively, and fN N (·) represents two convolutional layers with weights W1 and W2. The encoder maps each observation 

ot to a compact spatial feature Ft ∈ R. 

> Fig. 2. Perception modules. (a) Instantaneous observations: Limited FOV risks collisions in unobserved regions. (b) Temporal encoding: Spatiotemporal feature integration improves scene understanding to enable collision-free navigation.

While the MPC expert uses privileged environmen-tal information, the E2E planner reasons about the 3D scene from historical observation sequences. A TCN is employed to infer task-relevant spatiotemporal context from the finite observation window. Compared to recur-rent architectures, TCNs offer improved gradient stability and parallelized computation. The spatial feature Ft is concatenated with the current velocity vt to form an aug-mented feature vector ¯Ft = [ F ⊤ 

> t

, v⊤ 

> t

]⊤, forming the input matrix ¯Ft−k:t over the temporal window. A three-layer TCN with dilated causal convolutions (dilation factors 

[1 , 2, 4] ) expands the receptive field to capture multiscale dependencies while strictly preserving causality ( τ ≤ t). As illustrated in Fig. 2, planners based on instantaneous observations face higher collision risks in constrained geometries due to limited FOV. In contrast, the TCN-based approach integrates recent observations to reduce spatial ambiguity and retain short-term obstacle context. The TCN outputs a latent spatiotemporal matrix H,which is compressed into a global embedding ho and concatenated with target goal features for downstream planning. This embedding provides temporal consistency to support navigation under partial observability. 

D. Constraint-Aware Policy Distillation 

Our constraint-aware PIL leverages B´ ezier curves, enabling the student policy to distill full teacher-planned trajectories rather than single-step actions. Furthermore, it incorporates explicit constraint penalties directly into the imitation learning objective. 

1. Trajectory Planning Module 

The trajectory planning module transforms the latent environmental embedding ho and goal state xg into ac-tionable control points. To facilitate directional reasoning, the goal position pg (extracted from xg ) is pre-processed into a goal direction vector gd ∈ R3.

gd =

( pt−pg 

> ∥pt−pg∥2

, if ∥pt − pg ∥2 ≥ 1

pt − pg , otherwise (17) This module is implemented as a 2-layer MLP with 256 hidden units and ReLU activations. It generates a set of control points Uθ,t characterizing a piecewise B´ ezier tra-jectory. This parameterization allows the distillation pro-cess to evaluate system, continuity, and obstacle-clearance residuals directly from the student output, thereby encour-aging smooth and constraint-consistent trajectories. 

2. Privileged Imitation Learning Objective 

The distillation process is governed by two synergistic objectives: a primary imitation loss to match the expert’s behavior and a constraint-aware loss to restrict the output space. Given a dataset D = {(ot−k:t, xg , Ue,t )}Nt=1 col-lected from the MPC expert πe, the optimal parameters 

θ∗ are found by minimizing 

θ∗ = arg min  

> θ

E(ot−k:t, xg , Ue, t)∼D [ℓi (Uθ, t, Ue, t)+ℓc (Uθ, t)] (18) where Uθ, t is the control point output of the student pol-icy πθ , ℓi(·) is a similarity metric measuring the distance between the learned policy πθ and its demonstrator πe, ℓc

is a loss function related to constraints. The imitation loss ℓi is defined as the mean Smooth 

L1 loss, which provides robustness against outliers while maintaining sensitivity to small errors. Hence, the imita-tion loss ℓi is given by 

ℓi (Uθ, t, Ue, t) = SmoothL 1 (Uθ, t − Ue, t) (19) where SmoothL 1 is an element-wise operator defined by 

SmoothL 1(x) = 

(

0.5x2, if |x| ≤ 1

|x| − 0.5, otherwise (20) To encourage the student policy to respect the physical and obstacle-clearance boundaries established in Section III, the constraint loss ℓc is formulated as 

ℓc (Uθ, t) = λc1ReLU (ud − AdUθ, t)+ λc2ReLU (AdUθ, t − ud)) + λc3 ∥AcUθ, t − c∥1

+ λc4ReLU  As[U ⊤ 

> θ,t

, 0⊤]⊤ − us



(21)    

> 6IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX 2022

Algorithm 1 PILOT Algorithm Require: Dataset D, expert policy πe, environment E,learning rate η

Ensure: Student policy πθ

Initialize D ← − ∅ 

for i = 1 , 2, · · · , I do 

oi, Xo, xg ← ResetEnvironment (E)

for t = 1 , 2, · · · , T do 

ot−k:t, xg ← GetDepthImageSequenceAndState (E)

Ue,t ← πe(sp, xg , Xo) // Eq.(7) 

ut ← ComputeControlInput (Ue,t ) {Eqs. (4)–(6) }

xt+1 ,ot+1 ← EnvironmentStep (ut)

D ← D ∪ (ot−k:t, xg , ut−1, Ue,t )

t ← t + 1 

end for end for 

Initialize the student policy πθ

for e = 1 , 2, · · · , E do 

B ← SampleBatch (D)

for each (xt, ot−k:t, pg , ut−1, Ue,t ) ∈ B do 

Uθ, t ← πθ (ot−k:t, xg )

L ← E [ℓi (Uθ, t, Ue, t) + ℓc (Uθ, t)] // Eq.(19) 

end for 

θ ← θ − η∇θ L

end for                

> TABLE I Hyperparameters for Policy Training.
> Parameters Values
> Imitation loss function SmoothL 1
> Type of ResNet ResNet18 MLP activation function ReLU Optimizer Adam TCN dilation factor {1,2,4}
> Learning rate η0.0001
> MLP hidden units 256 Training epochs 200 Batch size 64 Number of TCN layers 3Number of MLP layers 2

where λi (i ∈ { c1, . . . , c4}) are weights to balance each component. The first two terms penalize dynamic bound violations; the third penalizes C2 continuity across B´ ezier segments; and the final term uses the expert’s privileged point cloud and clearance mapping to penalize nominal clearance violations. These terms provides further penal-ties for the learned policy to satisfy dynamic feasibility, 

C2 continuity, and collision avoidance. The PILOT algorithm as shown in Algorithm 1 fol-lows a two-phase pipeline: a data collection phase and a policy training phase. In the data collection phase, the UAV is randomly initialized in a dense training arena, with trajectories planned by the privileged expert πe. In the training phase, the student policy πθ is updated using the Adam optimizer based on the joint loss in (18). The hyperparameters for policy training are given in Table I.                       

> TABLE II Constraints and hyperparameters for the expert policy
> Parameters Quadrotors Fixed-wing Aircraft
> λg88
> λu0.4 0.4
> λs,170 100
> λs,250 70
> ds0.75 2.0
> ∥v∥2312
> ∥v∥208
> ∥u∥2416
> ∥u∥200

IV. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS 

This section presents simulation evaluations of the proposed PILOT framework. We assess planner robust-ness and generalizability across unseen quadrotor envi-ronments, conduct ablation studies on the TCN and tra-jectory parameterization modules, and demonstrate cross-platform transferability via fixed-wing deployment. 

A. Simulation Setup and Configuration 

The PILOT framework is trained on NVIDIA Isaac Sim, leveraging a GPU-accelerated PhysX engine to fa-cilitate large-scale parallel training. Simulations are con-ducted on a workstation with an Intel Xeon Gold 5218R CPU and an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. The simulated depth stereo camera is modeled after the Intel RealSense D435i, using identical intrinsic and extrinsic parameters to generate the visual data. The parameters for the MPC expert are detailed in Table II, with fixed-wing physical constraints from [7]. Although the MPC expert uses privileged information, collision-avoidance parameters are tailored to each plat-form, for example, assigning a larger collision penalty to fixed-wing aircraft due to its reduced agility. The re-ported parameters follow two selection criteria. Kinematic bounds are dictated by physical platform capabilities, while safety distances and obstacle penalties account for platform scale, maneuverability, perception uncertainty, and turning demands. Objective weights and training hyperparameters are chosen empirically for MPC stabil-ity and convergence rather than guaranteed theoretical optimality; temporal history length is backed by the H5/H10/H15 ablation study. To test PILOT’s generaliza-tion capability, six unseen scenarios with diverse obstacle densities, geometries, and layouts are constructed (Fig. 3): 

• Sparse, Moderate, and Dense Arenas : Incorpo-rate cylindrical obstacles across increasing den-sity ranges (1/9–1/5 obs /m2 for quadrotors; 

1/250 –1/50 obs /m2 for fixed-wing aircraft) with platform-scaled radii. 

• Tilted Cylinder Arena : Extends the Moderate arena by randomly tilting cylinder z-axes in [0 ◦ 30 ◦].

• Cubic Arena : Substitutes cylinders for cubic obsta-cles ( 1/7 cube /m2) to test geometric generalization.  

> AUTHOR ET AL.: SHORT ARTICLE TITLE 7

• Narrow Gap Arena : Uses gates with a 1.3 m open-ing to assess navigation under strict spatial bounds. 

B. Evaluation Metrics 

1) Success Rate (SR): The percentage of trials where a UAV reaches the goal without collision. SR = Ns /Nt × 100% 

where Ns is the number of successful trials, and Nt is the total number of trials conducted. In our evaluation, we choose Nt = 100 for all testing scenarios. 

2) Distance to the Nearest Obstacle (D2NO): The mean of the minimum Euclidean distances between the trajectory and obstacle surfaces across successful trials, serving as a measure of safety margin. D2NO = 1

NsNsX

> k=1



min 

> 1≤i≤Tk

min 

> o⊂X o

∥pk(i) − o∥2



where Tk is the total number of discrete trajectory points in the k-th successful trial, pk(i) denotes the UAV posi-tion at the time step i of the k-th successful trial. 

3) Trajectory Length (TL): The average total dis-tance traveled during successful missions, indicating path efficiency and the avoidance of unnecessary maneuvers. TL = 1

NsNsX 

> k=1
> Tk−1

X

> t=1

∥pk(t + 1) − pk(t)∥2

A shorter trajectory length implies that the planner is more efficient in generating direct, collision-free trajectories with fewer redundant maneuvers. 

4) Computation Time (CT): The mean processing time per planning step, evaluating the computational cost. CT = 1

NsNsX 

> k=1
> Tk−1

X

> t=1

tk,p (t)

where tk,p (i) is the computation time at time step i of the 

k-th successful trial. A lower CT value reflects reduced computational latency, enabling faster onboard response times and supporting real-world deployment viability. 

5) Trajectory Heading Smoothness (THS): This metric quantifies the consistency of the aircraft’s orien-tation by evaluating the mean ( μTHS ) and variance ( σ2

> THS

)of the velocity direction ratios. 

μTHS = 1

NsNsX

> k=1

1

Tk − 1

> Tk

X

> t=1

vt,y 

vt,x 

!

σ2 

> THS

= 1

NsNsX

> k=1

1

Tk − 1

> Tk

X

> t=1

 vt,y 

vt,x 

− μTHS 

2!

where μTHS and σ2 

> THS

denote the mean and variance of the change in direction of the velocity, respectively, and 

vt,x , v t,y are the velocity components at the time step t.Lower values correspond to smoother directional changes, leading to more feasible trajectories. 

6) Trajectory Control Smoothness (TCS): Control effort and actuator stress are evaluated by the mean ( μTCS )and variance ( σ2

> TCS

) of the changes in inputs u.

μTCS = 1

NsNsX

> k=1

1

Tk − 1 

> Tk−1

X

> i=1

∥ui+1 − ui∥2

!

σ2 

> TCS

= 1

NsNsX

> k=1

1

Tk − 1 

> Tk−1

X

> i=1

(∥ui+1 − ui∥2 − μTC )2

!

where μTCS and σ2 

> TCS

denote the mean and variance of acceleration changes, respectively, and ∆t is the sampling interval. Smaller values indicate smoother variations in controls, suggesting reduced actuator stress and enhanced input efficiency. The THS and TCS metrics together cap-ture both trajectory-level and control-level smoothness. 

C. Quadrotor Performance and Ablation Studies 

We evaluate the learned E2E policy on a simulated quadrotor platform whose dynamics and sensor configura-tions mirror physical system constraints. Low-level track-ing relies on a geometric controller [47]. The framework is benchmarked against four primary baselines. 

• PILOT-S : A variant of the proposed framework without TCN, used to demonstrate the necessity of temporal encoding for scene understanding. 

• MPC Expert : A privileged MPC law serving as the performance upper bound. 

• EGO-Planner : An ESDF-free gradient-based local planner based on online B-spline optimization [48]. 

• NavRL : A RL-based navigation policy [49] learned via trial-and-error interaction with environments. 

1. Performance Evaluation on Quadrotors 

The evaluation is conducted using Monte Carlo sim-ulations ( 100 trials per arena) across six representative scenarios. The planner performance is assessed using four metrics–such as SR, D2NO, TL, and CT–where Fig. 3 shows the simulated results in one of the testing cases. The overall performance of the policies is summarized in Table III. Note that the expert MPC planner is free from visual perception errors, as it uses privileged location information of surrounding obstacles. As shown in Table III, PILOT-S exhibits a lower SR than PILOT in complex scenarios—specifically the Dense, Tilted Cylinder, Cubic, and Narrow Gap arenas. This performance gap stems from the limited FOV in the single-step images used by PILOT-S, whereas PILOT’s TCN-based fusion module implicitly reconstructs privi-leged obstacle information from temporal sequences to enhance environmental awareness. Furthermore, PILOT achieves consistently higher D2NO values and shorter TL than PILOT-S, yielding efficiency comparable to the MPC expert with significantly reduced computational overhead. Both PILOT and PILOT-S generate velocity and acceleration profiles that respect the quadrotor’s physical constraints, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Notably, the MPC                                                                                                                                   

> 8IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX 2022 TABLE III Evaluation of PILOT and benchmarks on quadrotors at different arenas Evaluation arenas Algorithms SR (%) D2NO (m) TL (m) CT (ms) MPC 100 0.646 20.211 53.779 PILOT 100 0.458 20.546 8.593 Sparse PILOT-S 100 0.397 20.597 4.654 EGO-Planner 100 0.449 20.531 5.756 NavRL 22 0.355 21.133 2.393 MPC 100 0.602 20.282 54.379 PILOT 100 0.424 20.559 8.816 Moderate PILOT-S 93 0.418 20.684 4.341 EGO-Planner 79 0.290 20.555 5.406 NavRL 95 0.298 21.585 2.191 MPC 100 0.519 20.860 55.200 PILOT 96 0.393 20.934 8.752 Dense PILOT-S 82 0.350 21.127 4.596 EGO-Planner 78 0.359 21.555 6.368 NavRL 63 0.190 21.060 2.192 MPC 100 0.603 20.279 55.671 PILOT 91 0.417 20.577 8.696 Tilted Cylinder PILOT-S 83 0.409 20.646 4.691 EGO-Planner 74 0.284 20.558 5.391 NavRL 95 0.287 21.570 2.168 MPC 100 0.603 20.280 55.827 PILOT 97 0.437 20.536 8.971 Cube PILOT-S 93 0.422 20.624 4.927 EGO-Planner 88 0.283 20.574 5.566 NavRL 97 0.313 21.120 2.107 MPC 100 0.679 20.635 53.046 PILOT 83 0.406 20.928 8.759 Narrow Gap PILOT-S 0---EGO-Planner 100 0.331 20.875 6.036 NavRL 81 0.183 20.856 2.168

expert generates higher accelerations during planning due to a higher navigation cost weight relative to the control input penalty specified in Table II. PILOT is also benchmarked against two state-of-the-art methods—EGO-Planner [48] and NavRL [49]—under identical conditions and metrics. As shown in Table III, both PILOT and EGO-Planner attain 100% SR in the Sparse arena. PILOT achieves higher SR in the Moderate, Dense, Tilted Cylinder, and Cube environments, whereas EGO-Planner yields higher SR in the Narrow Gap arena. Among successful trials, EGO-Planner exhibits shorter trajectory lengths and lower computation times, while PILOT maintains larger D2NO values across all arenas. All these indicate that EGO-Planner prioritizes path and computational efficiency, whereas PILOT provides im-proved navigation success rate and larger empirical ob-stacle clearances across diverse geometries and densities. Compared to NavRL, PILOT achieves higher SR across the Sparse, Moderate, Dense, and Narrow Gap arenas, equivalent SR in the Cube arena, and performs slightly lower in Tilted Cylinder. While NavRL consis-tently yields lower CT values, its reliability varies across environments. This variance stems from NavRL’s reliance on 3D ray casting over an occupancy voxel grid ( 10 ◦

angular resolution in the design). In Sparse arenas featur-ing thin, isolated obstacles with small angular footprints, obstacles can fall between adjacent rays undetected. In contrast, denser or larger obstacle surfaces are regularly intercepted by rays, yielding a more complete spatial representation. PILOT maintains larger D2NO clearance values and more consistent performance on all arenas. Overall, NavRL prioritizes compact ray-based perception and runtime efficiency, whereas PILOT delivers superior cross-arena reliability and larger empirical safety margins.  

> Fig. 3. Quadrotor trajectories across evaluation arenas: PILOT (red solid), PILOT-S (blue dotted), and MPC expert (orange dash-dotted).

To evaluate the impact of historical sequence length (k), the baseline PILOT ( k = 10 ) was compared against PILOT-H5 ( k = 5 ) and PILOT-H15 ( k = 15 ) in the Dense arena. As shown in Table IV, observation history horizon significantly affects performance. PILOT-H5 exhibits a drop in SR to 86% and a reduced minimum obstacle clearance of 0.307 m , indicating that insufficient temporal context degrades privileged information reconstruction. Although PILOT-H15 achieves an 89% SR, it still un-derperforms relative to the baseline. This suggests that in-creasing sequence length does not monotonically improve performance, as the added capacity complicates policy op-timization. Consequently, an intermediate sequence length (k = 10 ) provides an effective trade-off between capturing temporal dynamics and maintaining training stability.                                             

> TABLE IV PILOT algorithm performance with different input sequence lengths Scenario Algorithm SR (%) D2NO (m) TL (m) CT (ms) PILOT-H5 100 0.383 20.553 8.362 Sparse PILOT 100 0.458 20.546 8.593 PILOT-H15 100 0.456 20.608 8.738 PILOT-H5 96 0.380 20.740 8.280 Moderate PILOT 100 0.424 20.559 8.816 PILOT-H15 97 0.409 20.618 8.503 PILOT-H5 86 0.307 21.114 8.614 Dense PILOT 96 0.393 20.934 8.752 PILOT-H15 89 0.329 21.127 8.782

2. Ablation studies 

Ablation studies are used to evaluate the trajectory pa-rameterization module by comparing PILOT with PILOT-  

> AUTHOR ET AL.: SHORT ARTICLE TITLE 9Fig. 4. PILOT, PILOT-S, and MPC in the Dense arena.

A, a variant that directly emulates the MPC expert’s control inputs. Both models are trained for equal durations and evaluated across Sparse, Moderate, and Dense arenas. As detailed in Table V, PILOT achieves higher success rates and shorter average trajectory lengths than PILOT-A at comparable computational overhead. Analysis of the TCS metric in Fig. 5 reveals that PILOT yields smaller mean control input variations ( μ∆u) and lower variance across all scenarios, reflecting more stable control behav-ior. This stability is further supported by the THS met-ric, where PILOT exhibits smoother heading transitions with fewer oscillations than PILOT-A. Collectively, these empirical results indicate that trajectory parameterization improves task success and promotes more executable and stable trajectories in the evaluated cluttered environments.                                   

> TABLE V Comparison of PILOT and PILOT-A on quadrotors Scenario Algorithm SR (%) D2NO (m) TL (m) CT (ms) Sparse PILOT 100 0.458 20.456 8.593 PILOT-A 100 0.422 20.352 8.636 Moderate PILOT 100 0.424 20.559 8.752 PILOT-A 93 0.413 20.438 8.556 Dense PILOT 96 0.393 20.934 8.782 PILOT-A 90 0.358 21.129 8.753
> Fig. 5. TCS and THS performance of PILOT and PILOT-A based on Monte Carlo simulation ( 100 times for each arena).

In summary, simulation results and ablation studies show that PILOT learns an efficient visual trajectory                                              

> Fig. 6. PILOT and PILOT-A in the Dense arena. TABLE VI Comparison of PILOT, PILOT-S, and MPC on fixed-wing aircraft Scenario Algorithm SR (%) D2NO (m) TL (m) CT (ms) MPC 100 3.102 100.159 51.914 Sparse PILOT 100 2.441 100.148 8.272 PILOT-S 100 2.426 100.257 4.290 MPC 100 2.041 100.238 58.734 Moderate PILOT 100 1.818 100.308 8.683 PILOT-S 99 1.774 100.421 4.139 MPC 100 1.681 100.444 51.402 Dense PILOT 98 1.651 100.483 8.597 PILOT-S 93 1.474 100.542 4.309

planner with high empirical success rates and obstacle clearances in the evaluated cluttered environments. These results characterize performance on the tested distribution and do not constitute a formal runtime safety guarantee. PILOT matches the MPC expert’s trajectory quality with reduced computational cost. Additionally, it improves upon PILOT-S across SR, clearance distance, and path ef-ficiency, while outperforming PILOT-A through smoother control profiles enabled by trajectory parameterization. 

D. Generalization to Fixed-wing Aircraft 

To verify the model-agnostic feature of the proposed PILOT framework, we applied it to a fixed-wing aircraft. It is assumed that the fixed-wing aircraft is flying hor-izontally with its altitude kept constant by a separate controller. Hence, the fixed-wing aircraft dynamics are 

˙pn = Vg cos ψ, ˙pe = Vg sin ψ (22) where pn and pe are positions in the north and east directions, respectively; Vg is the ground speed; and ψ

is the heading angle. For the evaluation, an L1 guidance law [50] is used to regulate the heading rate by selecting a reference point one second ahead of the current position. As given in Table VI, PILOT achieves performance comparable to the MPC expert across diverse arenas while drastically reducing computational overhead. In Sparse and Moderate environments, PILOT maintains a 100% SR with lower D2NO values than the MPC expert. This indicates that PI-LOT plans more aggressive trajectories closer to obstacles    

> 10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX 2022

while retaining a 100% empirical SR in these scenarios; it does not establish safety outside the evaluated conditions. Even in the Dense arena, PILOT maintains a high SR of 

98% , demonstrating empirical robustness under the tested limited-maneuverability conditions. Compared to the non-temporal baseline (PILOT-S), PILOT attains higher SR and improved D2NO metrics across all environments, fur-ther validating the benefit of TCN-based spatiotemporal reasoning. As shown in Fig. 7, both learning frameworks respect fixed-wing constraints, producing path lengths similar to the MPC expert with much less computational latency–making them well-suited for real-time onboard deployment. Overall, these results provide empirical evi-dence of cross-platform applicability of PILOT.  

> Fig. 7. PILOT, PILOT-S, and MPC in the Dense arena (fixed-wing).

V. REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENTS 

To evaluate real-world performance, the simulation-trained PILOT policy was deployed zero-shot onto a cus-tom quadrotor across one indoor and two outdoor unseen environments. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the autonomous platform features an Intel RealSense D435i stereo camera (≈ 7 m range) for depth sensing and VINS-Fusion for visual-inertial odometry. High-level localization and planning run in real time on an onboard Intel NUC11TNK computer with low-level attitude control provided by PX4.  

> Fig. 8. The physical platform used in real-world experiments.

For the indoor evaluation, the quadrotor navigates a constrained 5 m ×9 m space containing rectangular prisms and doorways to reach a goal 6.5 m away. The policy operates under zero-shot transfer , receiving no real-world fine-tuning. As depicted in Fig. 9, the learned planner generates a trajectory online that is successfully tracked through the densely arranged obstacles using onboard per-ception. This experiment demonstrates zero-shot transfer and practical feasibility in the tested indoor environment, rather than a formal guarantee of dynamic feasibility or robustness under arbitrary real-world uncertainties.  

> Fig. 9. Quadrotor flight trajectory in the indoor experiment.

In the first outdoor experiment, the quadrotor equipped with the learned E2E planner is deployed in a natural wooded environment, as shown in Fig. 10. The learned planner successfully navigate the quadrotor through wooded area over a distance of approximately 15 m to the target point. The obstacle-avoidance behavior relies exclu-sively on onboard visual perception. This result demon-strates practical feasibility in the wooded environment. In the second outdoor experiment, the proposed method is evaluated in an environment with pillar obstacles, as shown in Fig. 11. These demonstrations provide evidence of zero-shot transfer across real-world environments.  

> Fig. 10. Experiments in a wooded area: top figure shows the flight trajectory, while (1)–(4) showing visual perception at key positions.

VI. CONCLUSIONS 

In this paper, we proposed PILOT (Privileged Imita-tion Learning for vision-based E2E UAV mOTion plan-ning), a learning algorithm that trains an E2E planner for UAV navigation in cluttered environments using limited visual measurements and constrained onboard computa-tion. Demonstration data generated by a privileged MPC  

> AUTHOR ET AL.: SHORT ARTICLE TITLE 11

Fig. 11. Flight experiments in environments with pillars, demonstrating the generalization of the learned E2E planner. 

expert guides offline policy training. To bridge the infor-mation gap, a perception fusion module based on a TCN infers task-relevant context from finite spatiotemporal measurements, while a trajectory parameterization mod-ule provides a structured output and supports smoothness and constraint-aware regularization. The learned planner is evaluated through simulations and hardware flight tests, demonstrating it matches the MPC expert’s trajectory quality while cutting computational latency by over 80% .Ablation studies confirm the necessity of both the TCN and trajectory parameterization components. Real-world experiments demonstrate zero-shot transfer and collision-free completion in the reported trials. Because the student uses training-time soft penalties, these results provide empirical evidence in the tested environments rather than a formal safety guarantee for arbitrary unseen conditions. Future work will incorporate dynamic obstacles and ex-ternal disturbances to enhance generality and robustness. 

REFERENCES 

[1] L. Xu, H. Lu, J. Wang, H. Oh, X.-G. Guo, and L. Guo, “Force-coordination control for aerial collaborative transportation based on lumped disturbance separation and estimation,” IEEE Trans-actions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 6037–6049, 2024. [2] J. Saunders, S. Saeedi, and W. Li, “Autonomous aerial robotics for package delivery: A technical review,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 3–49, 2024. [3] X. Liu, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and T. Hu, “Formation control for enclosing and tracking via relative localization,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 10 558–10 569, 2025. [4] X. Liu, L. Li, X. Zhou, Q. Zhang, and T. Hu, “Cooperative circum-navigation for multi-quadrotor systems via onboard sensing,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 9248– 9255, 2025. [5] K. D. Julian and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Distributed wildfire surveil-lance with autonomous aircraft using deep reinforcement learn-ing,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1768–1778, 2019. [6] Y. Hong, S. Jung, S. Kim, and J. Cha, “Extensions of receding horizon task assignment for area coverage in dynamic envi-ronments,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 3114–3128, 2023. [7] M. P. Adhikari and A. H. J. de Ruiter, “Online feasible trajectory generation for collision avoidance in fixed-wing unmanned aerial vehicles,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics ,vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1201–1209, 2020. [8] K. Mohta, M. Watterson, Y. Mulgaonkar, S. Liu, C. Qu, A. Maki-neni, K. Saulnier, K. Sun, A. Zhu, J. Delmerico, K. Karydis, N. Atanasov, G. Loianno, D. Scaramuzza, K. Daniilidis, C. J. Taylor, and V. Kumar, “Fast, autonomous flight in GPS-denied and cluttered environments,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 101–120, 2018. [9] J. Tang, Y. Wan, S. Lao, and Z. Zhao, “A distributed autonomous system for multi-uavs with limited visualization: Employing dual-horizon nmpc controller,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 6910–6924, 2024. [10] G. Lu, Y. Ren, F. Zhu, H. Li, R. Xue, Y. Cai, X. Lyu, and F. Zhang, “Autonomous Tail-Sitter Flights in Unknown Environments,” 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 41, pp. 1098–1117, 2025. [11] M. K. Kaiser, N. R. Gans, and W. E. Dixon, “Vision-based estimation for guidance, navigation, and control of an aerial vehicle,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Sys-tems , vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 1064–1077, 2010. [12] J. Park and Y. Kim, “Collision avoidance for quadrotor using stereo vision depth maps,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 3226–3241, 2015. [13] C. Zhai, C. Qu, H. Zhang, and X. Lei, “Safe coverage control of the vision-based uav system with a performance-boosting strat-egy,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems ,vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 15 155–15 165, 2025. [14] U. Eren, A. Prach, B. B. Koc ¸er, S. V. Rakovi´ c, E. Kayacan, and B. Ac ¸ıkmes ¸e, “Model predictive control in aerospace systems: Current state and opportunities,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 1541–1566, 2017. [15] G. Zhang and X. Liu, “Uav collision avoidance using mixed-integer second-order cone programming,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 1732–1738, 2022. [16] D. Zhang, C. Yu, F. Xue, and Q. Zhang, “Learning efficient flocking control based on gibbs random fields,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3478–3485, 2025. [17] Y. Song, A. Romero, M. M¨ uller, V. Koltun, and D. Scaramuzza, “Reaching the limit in autonomous racing: Optimal control versus reinforcement learning,” Science Robotics , vol. 8, no. 82, p. eadg1462, 2023. [18] J. Xing, A. Romero, L. Bauersfeld, and D. Scaramuzza, “Boot-strapping reinforcement learning with imitation for vision-based agile flight,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning ,2024. [19] M. Zare, P. M. Kebria, A. Khosravi, and S. Nahavandi, “A survey of imitation learning: Algorithms, recent developments, and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 7173–7186, 2024. [20] D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, and P. Kr¨ ahenb¨ uhl, “Learning by cheating,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning ,ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 100. PMLR, 30 Oct–01 Nov 2020, pp. 66–75. [21] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” 

Science Robotics , vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020. [22] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hut-ter, “Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the wild,” Science Robotics , vol. 7, no. 62, p. eabk2822, 2022. [23] Z. Wang, J. Li, and N. Mahmoudian, “Synergistic Reinforcement and Imitation Learning for Vision-driven Autonomous Flight of UAV Along River,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , Oct. 2024, pp. 9976– 9982. [24] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017, pp. 1003–1012. [25] E. Frazzoli, M. A. Dahleh, and E. Feron, “Real-time motion planning for agile autonomous vehicles,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 116–129, 2002. [26] D. Guo and K. K. Leang, “Image-based estimation, planning, and control for high-speed flying through multiple openings,” The 

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. XX, No. XX XXXXX 2022 International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1122–1137, 2020. [27] Z. Guan, Y. Ma, and Z. Zheng, “Moving path following with prescribed performance and its application on automatic car-rier landing,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2576–2590, 2020. [28] A. Marchidan and E. Bakolas, “Collision avoidance for an un-manned aerial vehicle in the presence of static and moving ob-stacles,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 96–110, 2020. [29] G. Zhu, Q. Zhang, B. Zhu, and T. Hu, “Heuristic predictive control for multirobot flocking in congested environments,” 

IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 1435–1446, 2025. [30] J. P. Wilhelm and G. Clem, “Vector field uav guidance for path following and obstacle avoidance with minimal deviation,” 

Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1848–1856, 2019. [31] J. Tordesillas and J. P. How, “Mader: Trajectory planner in multiagent and dynamic environments,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 463–476, 2022. [32] C. Toumieh and D. Floreano, “High-speed motion planning for aerial swarms in unknown and cluttered environments,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 40, pp. 3642–3656, 2024. [33] A. Loquercio, A. I. Maqueda, C. R. del Blanco, and D. Scara-muzza, “DroNet: Learning to Fly by Driving,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1088–1095, Apr. 2018. [34] F. Schilling, J. Lecoeur, F. Schiano, and D. Floreano, “Learn-ing vision-based flight in drone swarms by imitation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 4523–4530, 2019. [35] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Asymmetric Actor Critic for Image-Based Robot Learning,” in Robotics: Science and Systems XIV . Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, Jun. 2018. [36] Z. Xiao, X. Zhang, X. Zhou, and Q. Zhang, “PA-LOCO: Learn-ing perturbation-adaptive locomotion for quadruped robots,” in 

2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2024, pp. 9110–9115. [37] J. Tordesillas and J. P. How, “Deep-PANTHER: Learning-Based Perception-Aware Trajectory Planner in Dynamic Environ-ments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1399–1406, Mar. 2023. [38] T. Zhang, G. Kahn, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel, “Learning deep control policies for autonomous aerial vehicles with MPC-guided policy search,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , May 2016, pp. 528–535. [39] S. Ross, N. Melik-Barkhudarov, K. S. Shankar, A. Wendel, D. Dey, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert, “Learning monocular reactive UAV control in cluttered natural environments,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,May 2013, pp. 1765–1772. [40] J. Fu, Y. Song, Y. Wu, F. Yu, and D. Scaramuzza, “Learning Deep Sensorimotor Policies for Vision-Based Autonomous Drone Racing,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-ligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , Oct. 2023, pp. 5243–5250. [41] Y. Song, K. Shi, R. Penicka, and D. Scaramuzza, “Learning Perception-Aware Agile Flight in Cluttered Environments,” in 

2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA) , May 2023, pp. 1989–1995. [42] H. Nguyen, S. H. Fyhn, P. De Petris, and K. Alexis, “Motion primitives-based navigation planning using deep collision pre-diction,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2022, pp. 9660–9667. [43] J. Lu, B. Tian, H. Shen, X. Zhang, and Y. Hui, “LPNet: A Reaction-Based Local Planner for Autonomous Collision Avoidance Using Imitation Learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 7058–7065, Nov. 2023. [44] L. Schmitt and W. Fichter, “Collision-avoidance framework for small fixed-wing unmanned aerial vehicles,” Journal of Guid-ance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1323–1329, 2014. [45] B. Stellato, G. Banjac, P. Goulart, A. Bemporad, and S. Boyd, “Osqp: An operator splitting solver for quadratic programs,” in 2018 UKACC 12th International Conference on Control (CONTROL) , 2018, pp. 339–339. [46] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016, pp. 770–778. [47] T. Lee, M. Leok, and N. H. McClamroch, “Geometric tracking control of a quadrotor uav on se(3),” in 49th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2010, pp. 5420–5425. [48] X. Zhou, Z. Wang, H. Ye, C. Xu, and F. Gao, “Ego-planner: An esdf-free gradient-based local planner for quadrotors,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 478–485, 2021. [49] Z. Xu, X. Han, H. Shen, H. Jin, and K. Shimada, “Navrl: Learning safe flight in dynamic environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3668–3675, 2025. [50] S. Park, J. Deyst, and J. How, “A new nonlinear guidance logic for trajectory tracking,” in AIAA guidance, navigation, and control conference and exhibit , 2004, p. 4900. 

AUTHOR ET AL.: SHORT ARTICLE TITLE 13