Title: STEGNav: Spatio-Temporal Event Graph Reasoning for Multimodal Lifelong Object Navigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28279v1

Published Time: Mon, 31 Aug 2026 01:09:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# STEGNav: Spatio-Temporal Event Graph Reasoning for Multimodal Lifelong Object Navigation 

## Yang Chen 1,2 ∗, Zhenyu Huang 1,2 ∗, Wenbo Fu 1,2 , Danyang Peng 1,2 ,Shi-Yu Tian 1,3 , Kun-Yang Yu 1,3 , Lan-Zhe Guo 1,2 †

> 1

State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 

> 2

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University 

> 3

School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University 

Abstract 

Multimodal lifelong navigation requires an agent to au-tonomously explore unseen environments while sequentially completing navigation tasks specified by object categories, language descriptions, or reference images. Existing methods primarily accomplish these tasks by constructing state-centric semantic scene graphs. By treating scene graphs as persistent repositories of semantic observations, these methods struggle to distinguish similar instances, jointly represent semantic tar-gets and exploration frontiers, and effectively exploit naviga-tion memory and trajectory experience. To address these limi-tations, we propose Spatio-Temporal Event Graph Navigation (STEGNav ), a training-free framework that extends conven-tional scene graphs into spatio-temporal event graphs along complementary spatial and temporal axes. The spatial axis performs query-conditioned instance grounding and jointly represents semantic targets and occupancy-aware exploration frontiers characterized by reachability, path cost, and explo-ration utility. The temporal axis employs trajectory-aware dual-window memory to retain recent decision–trajectory events and verified cross-subtask navigation outcomes. A VLM-based navigation agent reasons over the resulting spatio-temporal event graph and selects either a target instance or an exploration frontier as its next navigation goal. STEGNav achieves 66 .3% SR and 39 .7 SPL on GOAT-Bench, as well as SR scores of 64 .0% and 69 .4% on HM3Dv1 and HM3Dv2, respectively. Ablation studies and error analyses validate the complementary effects of the two axes, demonstrating that event-driven spatio-temporal representations improve naviga-tion reliability and cross-subtask experience reuse. 

## Introduction 

Embodied navigation requires an agent to understand a tar-get, explore an unseen environment, and reach the target lo-cation (Savva et al. 2019; Batra et al. 2020). Recent advances in Vision Language Models (VLMs) enable zero-shot navi-gation toward open-vocabulary targets without task-specific training (Yokoyama et al. 2024a; Majumdar et al. 2022; Yu, Kasaei, and Cao 2023; Cai et al. 2024; Zhao et al. 2023; Li et al. 2026; Zhang et al. 2024). Meanwhile, navigation tasks are evolving from isolated single-target search to multi-modal lifelong navigation, where an agent must sequentially complete multiple subtasks specified by object categories, language descriptions, or reference images (Khanna et al. 2024; Busch et al. 2025). This setting requires the agent not 

> ∗

These authors contributed equally. 

> †

Corresponding author. Repeated Exploration Forgotten Memory Instance Ambiguity Semantic-Spatial Separation  

> !!!
> chair sofa chair plant table

?

> !
> Spatial Axis Temporal Axis
> F1 F2

Figure 1: Limitations of state-centric scene graphs. Spa-tially, they suffer from instance ambiguity and semantic– spatial separation; temporally, the lack of explicit navigation history leads to memory loss and repeated exploration. only to interpret queries from different modalities, but also to continually explore the environment and reuse knowledge accumulated across subtasks (Niu et al. 2026; Hu et al. 2026). Scene graphs provide a natural representation for lifelong navigation by organizing observed objects and their semantic relations into a graph structure (Gu et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2021; Yin et al. 2024). Recent methods further incorporate multi-modal observations and persistent memory into scene graphs to support open-vocabulary reasoning and long-horizon nav-igation (Ge et al. 2026; Huang et al. 2026b). However, ex-isting scene graphs are primarily state-centric and exhibit three major limitations: (1) they describe the objects cur-rently present in the environment but do not explicitly distin-guish among individual instances; (2) they fail to represent how the agent reached its current state or the potential spa-tial information associated with target states; and (3) they arXiv:2608.28279v1 [cs.RO] 28 Aug 2026 cannot effectively use prior decision experience to improve subsequent navigation. In contrast, multimodal lifelong navi-gation is inherently event-driven , as each navigation decision changes both the agent’s spatial knowledge and the historical experience available for future navigation. To address these limitations, we propose Spatio-Temporal 

Event Graph Navigation ( STEGNav ), a training-free frame-work for multimodal lifelong navigation. STEGNav extends a conventional scene graph along complementary spatial and temporal axes, transforming it into a spatio-temporal event graph . As illustrated in Fig. 1, the spatial axis constructs a query-conditioned, multi-layer semantic–navigational graph. Query-conditioned instance grounding associates the current query with individual scene instances, enabling the agent to distinguish different objects within the same category. Build-ing upon this grounding, occupancy-aware frontier ground-ing integrates semantic objects, exploration frontiers, reach-ability, path costs, and exploration utility into a unified graph structure. The navigation VLM can therefore directly select either a target-instance node or an exploration-frontier node from the same structured representation. The temporal axis introduces trajectory-aware dual-window memory to organize navigation experience at two timescales. The short-term window records recent high-level decisions, executed trajectories, traversed regions, and vis-ited frontiers, allowing the VLM to identify repeated navi-gation patterns. The long-term window retains only verified outcomes from previous subtasks and reconnects them to the evolving scene graph. By combining the two windows, the navigation policy can jointly leverage query-relevant in-stances, the current navigation state, recent trajectories, and cross-subtask experience within a unified representation. We evaluate STEGNav on GOAT-Bench for multimodal lifelong navigation and on HM3D for category-level Object-Nav generalization. On the GOAT-Bench Val-Unseen split, STEGNav achieves an SR of 66 .3% and an SPL of 39 .7,improving SR by 3.9 percentage points over the strongest competing method. On HM3Dv1 and HM3Dv2, STEGNav achieves SR of 64 .0% and 69 .4% , respectively. Error analy-sis further shows that STEGNav reduces the total number of failures by 34 .1% , including reductions of 53 .8% in instance confusion and 40 .0% in inefficient exploration. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose STEGNav, a training-free multimodal life-long navigation framework that transforms a state-centric scene graph into an event-driven spatio-temporal repre-sentation. 

• We develop a spatial axis that unifies query-conditioned instance grounding with occupancy-aware semantic– frontier relations, together with a temporal axis that or-ganizes recent navigation trajectories and verified cross-subtask outcomes through dual-window memory. 

• We conduct extensive experiments on GOAT-Bench and HM3D. The results demonstrate that STEGNav improves the reliability of multimodal navigation and generalizes effectively to ObjectNav, while ablation studies and error analysis further validate the effectiveness of the proposed spatial and temporal components. 

## Related Work 

Object Navigation 

Object navigation requires an embodied agent to locate a target in an unseen environment and execute navigation ac-tions toward it. Early methods primarily trained navigation policies through reinforcement learning or imitation learn-ing (Wijmans et al. 2020; Ye et al. 2021; Ramrakhya et al. 2022; Chaplot et al. 2020). Although these methods achieve strong performance within their training distributions, they typically rely on large-scale supervision and exhibit limited generalization to unseen environments and open-vocabulary targets. More recently, zero-shot navigation methods have leveraged pretrained vision-language models (Radford et al. 2021; Cheng et al. 2024) to establish semantic correspon-dences between open-vocabulary targets and visual observa-tions. CoW employs CLIP-based visual matching to iden-tify target-relevant regions, whereas VLFM constructs a target-conditioned value map to guide frontier-based explo-ration (Gadre et al. 2023; Yokoyama et al. 2024a). Zero-shot object navigation has further evolved from iso-lated single-target search (Batra et al. 2020; Yadav et al. 2023; Yokoyama et al. 2024b; Zhang et al. 2025; Krantz et al. 2023; Lei et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2026a; Huang et al. 2026a; Goetting, Singh, and Loquercio 2025; Wang et al. 2026b; Zhang et al. 2026) to long-horizon navigation in-volving multimodal target sequences (Khanna et al. 2024; Wani et al. 2020; Ziliotto et al. 2025; Ji, Lin, and Gao 2025). Under this setting, an agent must not only interpret targets specified through different modalities without task-specific training, but also continually retain and reuse environmental knowledge acquired across multiple subtasks. 

Scene-Graph-Based Lifelong Navigation 

Scene graphs provide structured environmental represen-tations by organizing objects, regions, and their semantic and spatial relations. Compared with dense geometric maps, scene graphs explicitly encode semantic knowledge, thereby providing more direct support for high-level reasoning and long-horizon planning (Niu et al. 2026; Ge et al. 2026; Rosi-nol et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2024, 2025; Rajvanshi et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2025; Fang, Fang, and Wang 2025). MTU3D combines scene graphs with persistent memory to support lifelong multi-target navigation (Zhu et al. 2025). Building upon this paradigm, MSGNav retains visual evidence in a multimodal 3D scene graph to support open-vocabulary rea-soning and final viewpoint selection (Huang et al. 2026b). Existing methods treat scene graphs as persistent, state-centric repositories, limiting their ability to distinguish sim-ilar instances, integrate semantic targets with exploration frontiers, and exploit trajectories and cross-subtask expe-rience. STEGNav instead extends scene graphs along com-plementary spatial and temporal axes. The spatial axis asso-ciates queries with candidate instances and integrates navi-gation status and exploration utility, while the temporal axis maintains recent trajectories and retrieves query-relevant out-comes. Together, they form a reusable, event-driven spatio-temporal representation for multimodal lifelong navigation. table #14 picture #5                

> Navigation Query
> Object Image The table is in the dining room. It is beside the sofa.
> table #27
> F1
> A. Short-Term (decision trajectory) B. Long-Term (task event)
> table #2 t - 2 t
> Selected object or frontier node
> Executed trajectory segment
> Traversed semantic regions
> Path length ... 12345RGB-D
> Edge Types
> Frontier-Semantic Query-Instance Decision-Trajectory Task-Event
> STEG-Driven Navigation
> Build Scene Graph Serialize STEG Select Object / Frontier
> Plan & Execute
> Verify & Update
> Instance Grounding + Frontier Grounding
> 0.18 0.92 0.26
> F1
> Language
> Navigation Input
> Pose
> Node Types
> Object Frontier
> Spatial Axis: Semantic-Navigational Graph Temporal Axis: Trajectory-Aware Dual-Window Memory
> F3 F2
> table #2 sofa #4
> F2 t - 1 s - 3 s - 2 table s - 1 s
> The table is in the dining room. It is beside the sofa.
> Recall
> or Recall
> Occupancy map Semantic map
> select serialize execute multi-modal tasks
> update
> FF

Figure 2: Overview of STEGNav. The spatial axis unifies query-conditioned instances with occupancy-aware frontiers, while the temporal axis organizes recent trajectories and verified cross-subtask outcomes. Their integration forms a spatio-temporal event graph for VLM-based navigation, verification, and continual update. 

## Preliminaries 

Scene-Graph-Based Multimodal Lifelong Navigation 

In an unseen scene S, an agent sequentially completes a set of multimodal navigation subtasks {qk}Kk=1 within a single episode. Each query qk = (ck, m k) speci-fies a target category ck and a query modality mk ∈{object , language , image }. The object modality specifies a category-level target, whereas the language and image modalities refer to a particular physical instance. At each time step, the agent receives an RGB-D observation and outputs a navigation action. A subtask is considered suc-cessful if the agent issues stop within 1.0 m of an instance satisfying the current query. The agent maintains an online semantic scene graph Gt =(Vt, Et). Each object node is represented as 

vti =  i, c i, B ti , ℓ ti, f ti , I ti

 , (1) where i is a persistent identifier, ci is the semantic category, 

Bti is the current 3D bounding box, ℓti is the room label, 

f ti is the aggregated appearance feature, and Iti is a repre-sentative RGB crop of the instance. Matched observations update existing nodes, whereas unmatched observations in-stantiate new ones. The current center of node i is given by 

pti = center( Bti ).The agent additionally maintains an occupancy map Oocc  

> t

.At each step, the depth observation is projected into a 3D point cloud, transformed into the global coordinate frame using the agent pose, and accumulated into a 2D grid that distinguishes free, occupied, and unexplored regions. Fron-tier cells are identified at the boundaries between explored free space and unexplored space, and adjacent frontier cells are clustered into frontier regions to form Ft, with their ex-ploration gains estimated from the surrounding unexplored area. At each high-level decision step, a VLM-based category prefilter P retains the scene nodes whose semantic categories are relevant to the current target. The retained subgraph is serialized, while the exploration frontiers are provided as a separate input: 

Vpre  

> k,t

= P (ck, Gt),yk,t = πVLM 



qk, Ser 



Gt[Vpre  

> k,t

]



, Ft



. (2) Although P preserves nodes related to the target category, it cannot distinguish different physical instances belonging to the same category. Moreover, the scene graph and the occupancy-derived frontiers are represented independently, preventing the navigation policy from jointly reasoning about target identity, traversability, and exploration utility. 

Motivation 

Existing scene-graph-based navigation policies typically pre-serve objects related to the target category while representing occupancy-derived frontiers as separate information. This design introduces two limitations. Spatially, category-level filtering cannot distinguish among same-category instances, while the separation between semantic nodes and explo-ration frontiers prevents joint reasoning over target identity, traversability, and exploration utility. Temporally, the online scene graph records only the current environmental state without explicitly preserving the navigation process, which can lead to repeated exploration and the loss of previously verified targets. These limitations motivate a spatio-temporal event graph that unifies semantic instances with occupancy-aware spatial information along the spatial axis and orga-nizes recent navigation trajectories and verified historical outcomes along the temporal axis. 

## Method 

Method Overview 

For the current subtask qk, we first construct a query event uk = ( qk, c k, m k). The spatial axis builds a query-conditioned semantic–navigational graph Gspa  

> k,t

that jointly represents semantic instances, their navigation relations, and exploration gains. The temporal axis maintains recently exe-cuted decisions and their trajectories in a short-term window 

Mst 

> k,t

, while retaining verified navigation outcomes from previous subtasks in a long-term window Mlt  

> k

.Together, these components form the spatio-temporal event graph 

VH 

> k,t

= Vspa  

> k,t

∪ M st  

> k,t

∪ M lt  

> k

,

EH 

> k,t

= Espa  

> k,t

∪ E st  

> k,t

∪ E lt 

> k,t

,

Hk,t =  VH

> k,t

, EH

> k,t

 .

(3) The resulting graph provides a unified representation of target semantics, traversability, exploration utility, recent naviga-tion trajectories, and verified navigation history. The frame-work is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

Spatial Axis: Multi-Layer Semantic–Navigational Graph 

Query-Conditioned Instance Grounding. We first apply the category prefilter P to preserve all scene nodes seman-tically related to the target category. A VLM-based instance grounding module Φinst then evaluates each retained node using the current query, its visual representation, and its spa-tial context: 

 rtk(i), d tk(i) = Φ inst 

 qk, v ti

 , vti ∈ V pre  

> k,t

, (4) where rtk(i) denotes the query–instance relevance and dtk(i)

denotes a query-conditioned language description of instance 

i.For an image query, the grounding module evaluates the visual correspondence between the reference image and the stored appearance Iti of each instance. For a language query, it grounds the target attributes to the appearance, room, and spatial context of each instance. For a category-level object query, no instance-level pruning is performed. For image and language queries, we retain the top-N most relevant instances and construct query–instance edges carrying 

 rtk(i), d tk(i), I ti

 (5) as their attributes. The complete object nodes remain per-sistently stored in Gt, while only compact query-relevant information is exposed to the navigation VLM. 

Occupancy-Aware Frontier Grounding. We augment the spatial representation of semantic instances with navigation information derived from the occupancy map. Adjacent fron-tier cells are first grouped into frontier regions, with each region represented by a frontier node gtr . Each frontier node stores its spatial center, reachable path distance, estimated exploration gain, and recent visitation state. Each reachable frontier is connected to nearby semantic nodes located within the same traversable region. The result-ing frontier–semantic edges describe the local semantic con-text into which the frontier leads. The occupancy map further establishes navigation edges from the current agent node to both object and frontier nodes. Each navigation edge records the reachability and geodesic path cost of the corresponding target. Consequently, a semantic object node represents not only category- and instance-level information, but also its current navigation status. Let Vsem  

> k,t

contain the currently grounded target instances, the instances recalled along the temporal axis, and the com-pact semantic anchors required to contextualize the explo-ration frontiers. The resulting spatial graph is defined as 

Gspa  

> k,t

=



Vspa  

> k,t

, Espa 

> k,t



,

Vspa  

> k,t

= {uk, v agent  

> t

} ∪ V sem  

> k,t

∪ V fr  

> t

,

Espa  

> k,t

= Esem  

> k,t

∪ E qry  

> k,t

∪ E nav  

> k,t

.

(6) Here, Esem  

> k,t

contains the semantic and spatial relations in-herited from the scene graph, Eqry  

> k,t

connects the query event to the grounded target instances, and Enav  

> k,t

represents occupancy-derived reachability, path costs, and frontier con-nections. Candidate objects and exploration frontiers are thus represented within the same graph structure rather than being provided to the VLM as separate inputs. 

Temporal Axis: Trajectory-Aware Dual-Window Memory 

The temporal axis jointly maintains the recent navigation process within the current subtask and navigation outcomes retained across subtasks. 

Short-Term Decision-Trajectory Window. After each high-level decision is executed, we append a short-term event containing the selected object or frontier node, the executed trajectory segment, the traversed semantic regions, the path length, and the execution outcome. Object-directed decisions reference persistent scene-node identifiers, whereas frontier-directed decisions retain their corresponding semantic an-chors and spatial regions. Rather than storing the complete sequence of low-level poses, each trajectory segment is compactly represented by its start and end states, traversed graph nodes, and occu-pancy coverage. Consecutive events are connected by tem-poral edges, and each event is linked to the object or frontier node that triggered the corresponding trajectory. The stored trajectories are subsequently projected onto the current spa-tial graph to update frontier visitation states and identify previously traversed regions. This representation explicitly exposes repeated paths and explored frontiers to the VLM without imposing a hard exploration constraint. The short-term window retains the latest Wst executed high-level decisions together with their corresponding tra-jectories. Repeated decisions involving the same object or spatial region remain as distinct events, thereby preserving the actual navigation sequence. The short-term window is cleared when the current subtask terminates. 

Long-Term Task-Event Window. The long-term window stores outcomes that receive positive VLM verification. After navigating toward instance i∗

> k

, the outcome is verified by 

wk = 1iterm  

> k

= i∗ 

> k

∧ ok = + ∧ dk ≤ δ , (7) where iterm  

> k

denotes the instance associated with the terminal observation, ok ∈ { +, −} is the VLM judgment based on the query and terminal visual evidence, and dk is the dis-tance from the terminal agent pose to the selected node. No simulator ground truth is used during verification. When wk = 1 , the outcome is stored as an event anchor 

ak, containing the reached instance identifier, target cate-gory, query modality, historical query, terminal appearance feature, and room label, without fixed coordinates. We set 

Wlt = 8 . These anchors serve only as recall cues and are re-associated with the current scene graph rather than treated as ground-truth targets. Short-term object events are reconnected through persis-tent scene-node identifiers. For a long-term anchor a, an exact identifier match is accepted directly. If the identifier is un-available because of graph merging or node re-instantiation, we compute 

ρt(i, a ) = ¯f ti , ¯fa . (8) The association is accepted when ρt(i, a ) ≥ γhi and the available room labels are consistent, and rejected when ρt(i, a ) ≤ γlo . Ambiguous cases are resolved by a lightweight VLM verifier. 

Spatio-Temporal Event-Graph Navigation 

At each decision step, the currently grounded instances are combined with the scene nodes referenced by the two tem-poral windows. Temporally recalled nodes are re-grounded using the latest scene graph and occupancy map, ensuring that their appearance, position, and traversability reflect the current state. Short-term trajectory events are then connected to the current semantic and frontier nodes through persistent identifiers, semantic anchors, and spatial overlap, producing the current trajectory context Zt.After these connections are established, the updated event graph is serialized as 

hevt  

> k,t

= Ser 

 eHk,t 



,yk,t = πVLM 

 qk, hevt 

> k,t

 .

(9) Unlike the baseline in Eq. (2), exploration frontiers are di-rectly incorporated into eHk,t rather than being provided as an independent list. The serialized graph exposes query-conditioned instance descriptions, relevance scores, current reachability, frontier exploration utility, recent decision tra-jectories, and verified historical outcomes to the VLM. Algorithm 1: Trajectory-Aware Spatio-Temporal Event-Graph Navigation 

Require: Query qk , scene graph Gt, occupancy map Oocc  

> t

, long-term memory Mlt 

> k

Ensure: Updated long-term memory Mlt  

> k+1
> 1:

uk ← (qk , c k , m k ) 

> 2:

Mst ← ∅ 

> 3:

Mlt  

> k+1

← M lt  

> k
> 4:

while qk is active and the step budget remains do  

> 5:

Vpre ← P (ck , Gt) 

> 6:

(Rst , Rlt , Zt) ← TemporalLink( Mst , Mlt  

> k

, Gt) 

> 7:

Vtar ← InstanceGround( qk , Vpre , Rst , Rlt ) 

> 8:

Ft ← Frontier( Oocc  

> t

) 

> 9:

Gspa ← SpatialGraph( uk , Vtar , Gt, Ft, Oocc  

> t

, Zt) 

> 10:

eH ← EventGraph( Gspa , Mst , Mlt  

> k

) 

> 11:

y ← VLMSelect( qk , eH) 

> 12:

if y is an object node then  

> 13:

i∗ 

> k

← NodeID( y) 

> 14:

(ok , d k , i term  

> k

, ξ t) ← Navigate( pti∗ 

> k

) 

> 15:

Update Gt and Oocc  

> t
> 16:

Compute wk using Eq. (7)  

> 17:

else  

> 18:

(ok , ξ t) ← Explore( y) 

> 19:

Update Gt and Oocc  

> t
> 20:

wk ← 0 

> 21:

end if  

> 22:

est  

> t

← DecisionEvent( y, ξ t, o k , Gspa ) 

> 23:

Mst ← AppendShort( Mst , e st  

> t

) 

> 24:

if wk = 1 then  

> 25:

Construct the long-term event anchor ak 

> 26:

Mlt  

> k+1

← UpdateLong( Mlt  

> k

, a k ) 

> 27:

break  

> 28:

end if  

> 29:

end while  

> 30:

Clear Mst 

The navigation VLM directly selects either a target-instance node or an exploration-frontier node. When an ob-ject node is selected, the agent navigates toward its current center. When a frontier node is selected, the agent follows the corresponding occupancy-derived path. After either deci-sion, the executed trajectory and its outcome are appended to the short-term window. A verified object-navigation success additionally produces a long-term event anchor. Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete navigation policy. 

## Experiments 

Experimental Setup 

Benchmarks. We evaluate STEGNav on two established embodied navigation benchmarks in the Habitat simulator. GOAT-Bench (Khanna et al. 2024) evaluates multimodal life-long navigation using object, language, and image queries. Its Val-Unseen split contains 36 scenes, with 10 episodes per scene and 5–10 sequential subtasks per episode. We use GOAT-Bench as our primary benchmark because it jointly evaluates multimodal target grounding, long-horizon explo-ration, and cross-subtask experience reuse. The main exper-imental results are evaluated on the full benchmark split. The ablation study and error analysis are conducted on a Table 1: Main results on the GOAT-Bench Val-Unseen split. MSGNav does not report SPL under our evaluation protocol.                                          

> Method Training-free SR ↑SPL ↑
> SenseAct-NN Monolithic [CVPR24] ✗12.3 6.8 SenseAct-NN Skill Chain [CVPR24] ✗29.5 11.3 MTU3D [ICCV25] ✗47.2 27.7 Modular CLIP on Wheels [CVPR24] ✓16.1 10.4 Modular GOAT [CVPR24] ✓24.9 17.2 VLMNav [NeSy25] ✓20.1 9.6 DyNaVLM [arXiv25] ✓25.5 10.2 TANGO [CVPR25] ✓32.1 16.5 3D-Mem [CVPR25] ✓42.6 22.8 EvoMemNav [arXiv26] ✓59.6 38.9 MSGNav [CVPR26] ✓62.4 –
> STEGNav (Ours) ✓66.3 39.7

fixed subset containing the first episode from each of the 36 scenes in the GOAT-Bench Val-Unseen split. We further evaluate category-level ObjectNav generaliza-tion on HM3D. HM3Dv1 contains 20 scenes and 2,000 episodes, while HM3Dv2 contains 36 scenes and 1,000 episodes. Both versions cover six object-goal categories. Al-though HM3D does not contain instance-specific multimodal queries, it provides a complementary evaluation of zero-shot target discovery and navigation efficiency. 

Evaluation Metrics. Following the standard evaluation protocol, we report Success Rate (SR) and Success weighted by Path Length (SPL). A subtask is considered successful if the agent issues stop within 1.0 m of an instance satisfying the current query. 

Implementation Details. We use YOLOv8-World (Cheng et al. 2024), SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023) for object-category recognition and CLIP for visual feature extraction and his-torical appearance association. We adopt ChatGPT-5.4-mini as the VLM backbone for instance grounding, navigation-target selection, and ambiguous event verification. We set the appearance-association thresholds to (γhi , γ lo ) =(0 .92 , 0.70) and use δ = 0 .8 m for internal outcome verifica-tion, which is stricter than the benchmark success threshold. The short-term window retains the latest Wst = 20 decision– trajectory events, while the long-term window stores up to 

Wlt = 8 verified subtask events. Complete prompts, graph serialization formats, module configurations, and VLM in-ference settings are provided in the Appendix. 

Main Experimental Results 

GOAT-Bench. Table 1 presents the results on the full GOAT-Bench Val-Unseen split. STEGNav achieves an SR of 66 .3% and an SPL of 39 .7, obtaining the highest SR and the highest directly comparable SPL among all evaluated methods. Compared with MSGNav, the strongest competing method in terms of SR, STEGNav improves SR by 3.9% .Since MSGNav does not report SPL under the evaluation protocol adopted in this work, we compare it only in terms of SR and exclude it from the SPL comparison. Compared with EvoMemNav, the strongest baseline reporting both met-rics under the same evaluation protocol, STEGNav improves Table 2: Object navigation results on the HM3D benchmarks.                                                                  

> Method Training-Free HM3Dv1 HM3Dv2
> SR ↑SPL ↑SR ↑SPL ↑
> ZSON [NeurIPS22] ✗25.5 12.6 ––PixNav [ICRA24] ✗37.9 20.5 ––SPNet [RA-L23] ✗31.2 10.1 ––CompassNav [ICLR26] ✗56.6 27.6 59.6 26.9 SGM [CVPR24] ✗60.2 30.8 ––L3MVN [IROS23] ✓50.4 23.1 36.3 15.7 VLFM [ICRA24] ✓52.5 30.4 63.6 32.5 SG-Nav [NeurIPS24] ✓54.0 24.9 49.6 25.5 UniGoal [CVPR25] ✓54.5 25.1 ––EvoMemNav [arXiv26] ✓59.2 33.6 63.8 39.4 STEGNav (Ours) ✓64.0 29.8 69.4 28.2

SR/SPL by 6.7% /0.8. These results demonstrate that STEG-Nav improves the reliability of multimodal lifelong navi-gation while maintaining competitive path efficiency. The visualization trajectories are presented in the appendix. 

HM3D ObjectNav. Table 2 reports the results on HM3Dv1 and HM3Dv2. STEGNav achieves SR/SPL scores of 

64 .0% /29 .8 on HM3Dv1 and 69 .4% /28 .2 on HM3Dv2. STEGNav obtains the highest SR on both benchmarks, out-performing the previous best results by 3.8% and 5.6% .These consistent improvements demonstrate that the pro-posed spatio-temporal representation generalizes from mul-timodal lifelong navigation to category-level ObjectNav and supports more reliable target discovery. However, STEGNav does not achieve the best SPL on HM3D, indicating that its higher success rate does not yet fully translate into shorter navigation paths under category-level navigation settings. 

Ablation Study 

We conduct cumulative ablation experiments on a fixed GOAT-Bench subset, with all variants using the same per-ception modules, VLM backbone, occupancy map, low-level planner, and stopping mechanism. As shown in Table 3, intro-ducing the 3D scene graph improves the overall SR/SPL from 

45 .7% /24 .5 to 55 .8% /33 .4, validating the effectiveness of semantic representations for long-horizon navigation. Building upon the scene graph, QIG further improves the overall SR/SPL to 59 .4% /36 .2, with more pronounced gains on language and image queries, demonstrating its ability to distinguish different physical instances within the same se-mantic category. This improvement is particularly important for instance-specific queries, where category-level match-ing may otherwise direct the agent toward a query-irrelevant object. Adding OFG further improves the overall SR/SPL to 

66 .9% /41 .1, yielding the largest incremental gain among the proposed components. In particular, the SR/SPL for image queries increases by 10 .2% /5.8. By explicitly associating se-mantic targets with reachable frontiers and their exploration gains, OFG enables the agent to balance target relevance against exploration utility and avoid repeatedly visiting low-information regions. Finally, DWM achieves the best overall SR/SPL of 

70 .9% /42 .7. It improves the SR for image queries from 

68 .2% to 73 .9% , indicating that recent navigation trajec-Table 3: Component ablation results on the GOAT-Bench Val-Unseen subset. QIG denotes query-conditioned instance grounding, OFG denotes occupancy-aware frontier grounding, and DWM denotes trajectory-aware dual-window memory. The best result in each column is highlighted in bold .

## Module Object Language Image Overall 

## 3D Scene Graph QIG OFG DWM SR SPL SR SPL SR SPL SR SPL 

## ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 50.5 24.0 41.8 22.5 44.3 27.0 45.7 24.5 

## ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ 61.6 30.5 51.6 32.0 54.5 38.0 55.8 33.4 

## ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ 64.1 32.0 55.6 35.3 58.0 41.7 59.4 36.2 

## ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ 70.7 37.8 61.5 38.6 68.2 47.5 66.9 41.1 

## ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 74.8 40.8 63.7 38.7 73.9 49.1 70.9 42.7 0 10 20 30 40 50 Instance confusion Execution / stopping Target grounding Memory recall Inefficient exploration 

> 13 18 22 25 45 614 16 18 27
> Scene-graph baseline STEGNav (Ours)

Figure 3: Failure counts of the 3D scene-graph baseline and STEGNav on the GOAT-Bench Val-Unseen subset (278). tories and verified historical events provide useful evidence for instance-specific navigation. Overall, the complete model outperforms the standard 3D scene-graph variant by 15 .1% 

and 9.3 in SR and SPL, respectively, confirming the comple-mentary effects of QIG, OFG, and DWM. 

Error Analysis 

We further categorize each failed subtask on the GOAT-Bench subset according to its primary cause, including in-efficient exploration, memory recall failure, target ground-ing failure, execution or stopping failure, and same-category instance confusion. The primary cause is determined from the selected high-level target, recalled historical events, ex-ecuted trajectory, and terminal state of each failed subtask. As shown in Fig. 3, STEGNav reduces the total number of failures from 123 to 81 , corresponding to a 34 .1% reduction over the controlled scene-graph baseline. This distribution provides complementary evidence to the aggregate SR and SPL results by revealing which stages of the navigation pro-cess benefit most from the proposed representation. Inefficient exploration exhibits the largest absolute reduc-tion, decreasing from 45 to 27 failure cases. This error cat-egory is reduced by 40 .0% , indicating that OFG and short-term trajectory memory help the agent avoid repeatedly vis-iting explored regions and low-utility frontiers. Instance con-fusion exhibits the largest relative reduction, decreasing from 

13 to 6 cases, corresponding to a reduction of 53 .8% . This re-sult validates the effectiveness of query-conditioned instance grounding in distinguishing same-category objects. Memory recall and target grounding failures decrease from 25 to 18 

and from 22 to 16 , respectively, reflecting the benefits of veri-fied event reuse and query-conditioned grounding. Execution and stopping failures decrease only from 18 to 14 , showing a relatively limited improvement and indicating that low-level execution issues, which are not directly addressed by the proposed graph representation, remain one of the primary sources of residual errors. Overall, the error pattern shows that STEGNav primarily improves high-level grounding, ex-ploration, and memory reuse, while leaving additional room for improving low-level control and termination decisions. 

## Conclusion 

We presented STEGNav, a training-free framework for mul-timodal lifelong navigation that extends scene graphs along spatial and temporal axes. The spatial axis constructs a query-conditioned semantic–navigational graph representing target instances, occupancy-aware frontiers, reachability, and ex-ploration utility. The temporal axis introduces dual-window memory to preserve decision–trajectory events and verified navigation outcomes from previous subtasks. By combining these two axes, STEGNav transforms the scene graph from a static repository of observations into an event-driven envi-ronmental representation, thereby supporting instance-aware target grounding, efficient exploration, and cross-subtask ex-perience reuse. Experiments on GOAT-Bench demonstrate that STEGNav improves both navigation success and path efficiency, while results on HM3Dv1 and HM3Dv2 further validate its generalization to category-level ObjectNav. Future work will investigate tighter integration between high-level event-graph reasoning and low-level navigation control to further improve navigation efficiency. References 

Batra, D.; Gokaslan, A.; Kembhavi, A.; Maksymets, O.; Mot-taghi, R.; Savva, M.; Toshev, A.; and Wijmans, E. 2020. ObjectNav Revisited: On Evaluation of Embodied Agents Navigating to Objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13171 .Busch, F. L.; Homberger, T.; Ortega-Peimbert, J.; Yang, Q.; and Andersson, O. 2025. One Map to Find Them All: Real-Time Open-Vocabulary Mapping for Zero-Shot Multi-Object Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation , 14835–14842. Cai, W.; Huang, S.; Cheng, G.; Long, Y.; Gao, P.; Sun, C.; and Dong, H. 2024. Bridging Zero-Shot Object Navigation and Foundation Models through Pixel-Guided Navigation Skill. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 5228–5234. Chaplot, D. S.; Gandhi, D.; Gupta, A.; and Salakhutdinov, R. 2020. Object Goal Navigation Using Goal-Oriented Se-mantic Exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 4247–4258. Cheng, T.; Song, L.; Ge, Y.; Liu, W.; Wang, X.; and Shan, Y. 2024. YOLO-World: Real-Time Open-Vocabulary Object Detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 16901–16911. Fang, X.; Fang, W.; and Wang, C. 2025. Hierarchical Semantic-Augmented Navigation: Optimal Transport and Graph-Driven Reasoning for Vision-Language Navigation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Gadre, S. Y.; Wortsman, M.; Ilharco, G.; Schmidt, L.; and Song, S. 2023. CoWs on Pasture: Baselines and Benchmarks for Language-Driven Zero-Shot Object Navigation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 23171–23181. Ge, Z.; Jia, X.; Wu, C.; Zhou, Y.; Wu, Z.; and Jiang, Y. 2026. EvoMemNav: Efficient Self-Evolving Fine-Grained Memory for Zero-Shot Embodied Navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03509 .Goetting, D.; Singh, H. G.; and Loquercio, A. 2025. End-to-End Navigation with Vision-Language Models: Transform-ing Spatial Reasoning into Question-Answering. In Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Neuro-symbolic Systems , 22–35. Gu, Q.; Kuwajerwala, A.; Morin, S.; Jatavallabhula, K. M.; Sen, B.; Agarwal, A.; Rivera, C.; Paul, W.; Ellis, K.; Chel-lappa, R.; et al. 2024. ConceptGraphs: Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Graphs for Perception and Planning. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 5021–5028. Hu, J.; Xue, X.; Ren, B.; Luo, M.; Chen, J.; Bai, H.; You, L.; and Xu, M. 2026. AstraNav-Memory: Contexts Compres-sion for Long Memory. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,8097–8109. Huang, J.; Huang, J.; Yang, H.; Li, H.; and Wang, Y. 2026a. AERR-Nav: Adaptive Exploration-Recovery-Reminiscing Strategy for Zero-Shot Object Navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.17712 .Huang, X.; Zhao, S.; Wang, Y.; Lu, X.; Zhang, W.; Qu, R.; Li, W.; Wang, Y.; and Wen, C. 2026b. MSGNav: Unleashing the Power of Multi-modal 3D Scene Graph for Zero-Shot Embodied Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,37154–37163. Ji, Z.; Lin, H.; and Gao, Y. 2025. DyNaVLM: Zero-Shot Vision-Language Navigation System with Dynamic View-points and Self-Refining Graph Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15096 .Khanna, M.; Ramrakhya, R.; Chhablani, G.; Yenamandra, S.; Gervet, T.; Chang, M.; Kira, Z.; Chaplot, D. S.; Batra, D.; and Mottaghi, R. 2024. GOAT-Bench: A Benchmark for Multi-Modal Lifelong Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 16373–16383. Kirillov, A.; Mintun, E.; Ravi, N.; Mao, H.; Rolland, C.; Gustafson, L.; Xiao, T.; Whitehead, S.; Berg, A. C.; Lo, W.; et al. 2023. Segment Anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,4015–4026. Krantz, J.; Gervet, T.; Yadav, K.; Wang, A.; Paxton, C.; Mottaghi, R.; Batra, D.; Malik, J.; Lee, S.; and Chaplot, D. S. 2023. Navigating to Objects Specified by Images. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 10916–10925. Lei, X.; Wang, M.; Zhou, W.; Li, L.; and Li, H. 2024. Instance-Aware Exploration-Verification-Exploitation for In-stance ImageGoal Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 16329–16339. Li, L.; Zhao, J.; Xie, Y.; Tan, X.; and Li, X. 2026. Compass-Nav: Steering from Path Imitation to Decision Understanding in Navigation. In Proceedings of the 14th International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Majumdar, A.; Aggarwal, G.; Devnani, B.; Hoffman, J.; and Batra, D. 2022. ZSON: Zero-Shot Object-Goal Navigation Using Multimodal Goal Embeddings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32340–32352. Niu, H.; Zhang, L.; Ji, X.; Ying, R.; Liu, P.; and Wen, F. 2026. SSMG-Nav: Enhancing Lifelong Object Naviga-tion with Semantic Skeleton Memory Graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01813 .Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Hallacy, C.; Ramesh, A.; Goh, G.; Agarwal, S.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; Mishkin, P.; Clark, J.; et al. 2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , 8748–8763. Rajvanshi, A.; Sikka, K.; Lin, X.; Lee, B.; Chiu, H.-P.; and Velasquez, A. 2024. SayNav: Grounding Large Language Models for Dynamic Planning to Navigation in New Environ-ments. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling , 464–474. Ramrakhya, R.; Undersander, E.; Batra, D.; and Das, A. 2022. Habitat-Web: Learning Embodied Object-Search Strategies From Human Demonstrations at Scale. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 5173–5183. Rosinol, A.; Gupta, A.; Abate, M.; Shi, J.; and Carlone, L. 2020. 3D Dynamic Scene Graphs: Actionable Spatial Per-ception with Places, Objects, and Humans. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems .Savva, M.; Kadian, A.; Maksymets, O.; Zhao, Y.; Wijmans, E.; Jain, B.; Straub, J.; Liu, J.; Koltun, V.; Malik, J.; et al. 2019. Habitat: A Platform for Embodied AI Research. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 9339–9347. Wang, H.; Li, Z.; Zhang, Y.; He, Z.; Jiang, L.; Li, K.; Zhao, Y.; Fan, L.; Hou, W.; Liang, T.; et al. 2026a. ConsistNav: Closing the Action Consistency Gap in Zero-Shot Object Navigation with Semantic Executive Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.09869 .Wang, Y.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, K.; Song, X.; Du, S.; and Jiang, S. 2026b. TrajRAG: Retrieving Geometric-Semantic Expe-rience for Zero-Shot Object Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 15166–15176. Wani, S.; Patel, S.; Jain, U.; Chang, A.; and Savva, M. 2020. MultiON: Benchmarking Semantic Map Memory Us-ing Multi-Object Navigation. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 9700–9712. Wijmans, E.; Kadian, A.; Morcos, A.; Lee, S.; Essa, I.; Parikh, D.; Savva, M.; and Batra, D. 2020. DD-PPO: Learning Near-Perfect PointGoal Navigators from 2.5 Billion Frames. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Representations .Wu, S.; Wald, J.; Tateno, K.; Navab, N.; and Tombari, F. 2021. SceneGraphFusion: Incremental 3D Scene Graph Prediction from RGB-D Sequences. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,7515–7525. Yadav, K.; Ramrakhya, R.; Ramakrishnan, S. K.; Gervet, T.; Turner, J.; Gokaslan, A.; Maestre, N.; Chang, A. X.; Batra, D.; Savva, M.; et al. 2023. Habitat-Matterport 3D Semantics Dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 4927–4936. Yang, Y.; Yang, H.; Zhou, J.; Chen, P.; Zhang, H.; Du, Y.; and Gan, C. 2025. 3D-Mem: 3D Scene Memory for Embodied Exploration and Reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,17294–17303. Ye, J.; Batra, D.; Das, A.; and Wijmans, E. 2021. Auxiliary Tasks and Exploration Enable ObjectGoal Navigation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 16117–16126. Yin, H.; Xu, X.; Wu, Z.; Zhou, J.; and Lu, J. 2024. SG-Nav: Online 3D Scene Graph Prompting for LLM-Based Zero-Shot Object Navigation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 5285–5307. Yin, H.; Xu, X.; Zhao, L.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, J.; and Lu, J. 2025. UniGoal: Towards Universal Zero-Shot Goal-Oriented Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 19057–19066. Yokoyama, N.; Ha, S.; Batra, D.; Wang, J.; and Bucher, B. 2024a. VLFM: Vision-Language Frontier Maps for Zero-Shot Semantic Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation , 42–48. Yokoyama, N.; Ramrakhya, R.; Das, A.; Batra, D.; and Ha, S. 2024b. HM3D-OVON: A Dataset and Benchmark for Open-Vocabulary Object Goal Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 5543–5550. Yu, B.; Kasaei, H.; and Cao, M. 2023. L3MVN: Leveraging Large Language Models for Visual Target Navigation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 3554–3560. Zhang, M.; Du, Y.; Wu, C.; Zhou, J.; Qi, Z.; Ma, J.; and Zhou, B. 2025. ApexNAV: An Adaptive Exploration Strategy for Zero-Shot Object Navigation With Target-Centric Seman-tic Fusion. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10(11): 11530–11537. Zhang, S.; Wang, Y.; Song, X.; Zhang, K.; Xu, Z.; and Jiang, S. 2026. Multi-Scale Gaussian-Language Map for Zero-shot Embodied Navigation and Reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 37086–37097. Zhang, S.; Yu, X.; Song, X.; Wang, X.; and Jiang, S. 2024. Imagine Before Go: Self-Supervised Generative Map for Object Goal Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,16414–16425. Zhao, Q.; Zhang, L.; He, B.; and Liu, Z. 2023. Semantic Pol-icy Network for Zero-Shot Object Goal Visual Navigation. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 8(11): 7655–7662. Zhu, Z.; Wang, X.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Ma, X.; Chen, Y.; Jia, B.; Liang, W.; Yu, Q.; Deng, Z.; et al. 2025. Move to Understand a 3D Scene: Bridging Visual Grounding and Exploration for Efficient and Versatile Embodied Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 8120–8132. Ziliotto, F.; Campari, T.; Serafini, L.; and Ballan, L. 2025. TANGO: Training-Free Embodied AI Agents for Open-World Tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 24603–24613. Supplementary Material Implementation Details 

This appendix complements the main paper with the im-plementation choices required to instantiate STEGNav. We focus on the method-level procedure, the principal hyperpa-rameters, prompts used for VLM reasoning and case study. 

Overall Navigation Procedure 

Algorithm 2 summarizes the complete online procedure. At each high-level step, the agent first updates the semantic scene graph and occupancy map from a set of egocentric RGB-D observations. The spatial axis then grounds the cur-rent query to candidate instances and augments the graph with occupancy-aware frontier nodes. The temporal axis re-connects recent decision–trajectory events and verified his-torical anchors to the current graph. A single VLM decision subsequently selects either an object instance, an exploration frontier, or an object visible in an earlier observation. The executed trajectory and its outcome are finally written back to the temporal representation. Algorithm 2: STEGNav Inference                                                                         

> Require: Queries q1, . . . , q K, graph G, occupancy map Oocc ,long-term memory Mlt
> 1: for k= 1 , . . . , K do
> 2: Mst ←∅
> 3: for t= 1 , . . . , B do
> 4: (Gt,Oocc
> t)←MapUpdate (Observe ())
> 5: (Ck,t ,Eqry
> k,t )←InstanceGround (qk,Gt)
> 6: (Vfr
> t,Enav
> t)←FrontierGround (Oocc
> t,Gt)
> 7: Zk,t ←TemporalLink (Mst ,Mlt ,Gt)
> 8: eHk,t ←ComposeEventGraph (Ck,t ,Vfr
> t,Zk,t )
> 9: yk,t ←πVLM (qk,Ser( eHk,t ))
> 10: (τk,t , o k,t )←Navigate (yk,t )
> 11: Mst ←Append (Mst , y k,t , τ k,t , o k,t )
> 12: if Verify (qk, o k,t ) = positive then
> 13: Mlt ←StoreAnchor (Mlt , q k, y k,t , o k,t )
> 14: break
> 15: end if
> 16: end for
> 17: end for

The step budget adapts to scene scale: 

B = max 



50 ,

j

2√A

k 

, (10) where A is the horizontal area of the scene bounding box in square metres. An object commitment may persist across multiple motion segments, whereas a frontier commitment is reconsidered after the next map update. 

Implementation Settings 

Perception and Online Mapping Each high-level step uses seven RGB-D observations: the current heading and six additional headings separated by 40 ◦. The simulator res-olution is 1280 × 1280 , with a 120 ◦ horizontal field of view, a camera height of 1.5 m, and a camera tilt of −30 ◦. Images passed to the VLM are resized to 512 × 512 .We use YOLOv8x-World for open-vocabulary detection, SAM-L for instance masks, and CLIP ViT-H-14-quickgelu with dfn5b weights for appearance features. The detector vocabulary is constructed from the semantic categories avail-able in each HM3D scene. The scene graph associates multi-view detections into persistent 3D object nodes and connects nearby nodes within 3.5 m. The occupancy representation uses a TSDF grid with 0.1 m resolution. No simulator se-mantic label or ground-truth goal position is supplied to the navigation policy. 

Query-Conditioned Instance Grounding Instance grounding is applied only to image and language-description queries. A category-level VLM prefilter first retains at most 20 relevant scene nodes. CLIP then pre-ranks these nodes and limits the grounding prompt to at most 10 candidate instances. The grounding VLM predicts a relevance score 

rtk(i) ∈ [0 , 1] and a query-conditioned description dtk(i)

for each candidate. We retain the five highest-scoring instances and represent them as query–instance edges. If VLM grounding is unavailable, CLIP similarity provides the relevance fallback. After the navigation VLM selects an object node, a same-class CLIP re-ranking stage is used for image and description queries. The selected node is changed only when another candidate improves the similarity by at least 0.05 . Category-level object queries bypass instance pruning and re-ranking because any instance of the requested category is valid. 

Occupancy-Aware Frontier Grounding Frontier cells are extracted at the boundary between agent-connected free space and unexplored space and clustered into frontier re-gions. Clusters spanning more than 150 ◦ around the agent are subdivided to avoid representing several exploration di-rections as one node. The minimum frontier size is 20 grid cells for GOAT-Bench and 10 cells for HM3D. Each frontier node contains its current centre, reachability, geodesic path cost, exploration gain, visitation state, and a facing RGB view. Exploration gain is the unexplored area within a 1.0 m dilation of the frontier region. A frontier is also connected to at most three semantic anchors within 2.5

m on the current traversable island. Agent-to-object edges contain the same reachability and path-cost attributes, allow-ing semantic targets and exploration frontiers to be compared in a common representation. The serialized spatial graph is ordered as query event, agent node, object nodes, frontier nodes, object relations, and visual evidence. Object coordinates and frontier coor-dinates are rounded to two decimal places. Relation images are selected by greedy coverage of the retained scene-graph edges. 

Trajectory-Aware Dual-Window Memory The short-term window retains the latest Wst = 20 executed decisions. Each event stores the selected node, trajectory endpoints, travelled distance, traversed semantic regions, frontier cover-age when applicable, and the execution outcome. Repeated visits remain separate events, preserving the actual temporal sequence. The window is cleared at the end of each subtask. The long-term window retains at most Wlt = 8 verified outcomes across subtasks in a GOAT-Bench episode. An event is admitted when 

wk = 1iterm  

> k

= i∗ 

> k

∧ ok = + ∧ dk ≤ δ ,δ = 0 .8 m , (11) where iterm  

> k

is the instance associated with the terminal ob-servation, ok is the VLM verification result, and dk is the terminal distance to the selected node. This verification uses the agent’s observations and current scene graph rather than simulator ground truth. Historical anchors are re-associated with live scene nodes using persistent identifiers and CLIP appearance similarity. We accept an appearance match when ρ ≥ 0.92 , reject it when ρ ≤ 0.70 , and use a VLM identity verifier for am-biguous cases. A spatial association radius of 0.6 m is used when comparing live same-class nodes. To avoid transferring category-level evidence to an incompatible instance-specific task, an anchor created by an object-category query cannot validate a later image or description query. 

Planning and VLM Inference The selected goal is pro-jected to the nearest valid cell on the agent-connected traversable island. GOAT-Bench uses a 1.0 m motion hori-zon for both object and frontier goals. HM3D uses 1.0 m for object goals and 1.8 m for frontier goals. After reaching a non-frontier goal, the VLM verifies the target using obser-vations from at most the latest five high-level steps. Bench-mark success is measured separately using the standard 1.0

m geodesic criterion. All reasoning modules use the same VLM backbone, 

gpt-5.4-mini . Decoding uses temperature 0.95 , a max-imum of 4096 output tokens, and one completion per re-quest. Thus, STEGNav does not use majority voting or self-consistency sampling. 

Core Prompt Templates 

The following prompt boxes present the main prompt con-tent. Angle-bracketed fields are filled at runtime, and image markers denote multimodal image parts. Fixed demonstra-tions and repeated graph rows are omitted for conciseness. 

Prompt 1: Category-Level Scene-Graph Prefilter System Prompt 

You are an AI agent in a 3D indoor scene. 

User Prompt 

Identify the scene-graph objects that are most helpful for locat-ing the target. Each object contains an identifier, class, room, and neighbouring object identifiers. 

Selection criteria: 

• semantic relevance to the target; 

• typical co-occurrence with the target; 

• likelihood of being in the same room; and 

• spatial diversity among the selected nodes. 

Task input: 

Question: <QUESTION> 

Prompt 1: Category-Level Scene-Graph Prefilter (contin-ued) 

<REFERENCE_IMAGE> , for image queries only. 

Scene-graph format: 

<ID>: <CLASS>, <ROOM>, [<NEIGHBOR_ID>, ...] 

Output format: Return only the selected object identifiers, one per line, in ranked order. Do not output an identifier that is absent from the input graph. 

Prompt 2: Query-Conditioned Instance Grounding System Prompt 

You are grounding a navigation query onto individual object instances in an indoor scene. Several instances of the same category may exist, and only one may match the query. Judge each candidate independently using its appearance and spatial context. 

User Prompt Query: 

Target category: <CLASS> 

Language query: <QUESTION> , or reference image: 

<REFERENCE_IMAGE> .

Candidate format: 

Instance <ID>: <CLASS>, room <ROOM>, position (<X>, <Z>, <Y>), near <IDs> <INSTANCE_VIEW> 

Hard rules: 

• For an image query, assess whether the candidate view shows the same physical instance as the reference image. 

• For a description query, assess whether appearance, room, and spatial context satisfy the description. 

Output format: Output exactly one line per candidate: <id> <relevance> <description> . The relevance must lie in [0 , 1] , and the description must briefly state the supporting visual evidence. Output no additional text. 

Prompt 3: Spatio-Temporal Event-Graph Navigation System Prompt 

You are an agent navigating an indoor scene. Reason over a spatio-temporal event graph and choose the next navigation goal. Find the requested target within <B> high-level steps. 

User Prompt Task input: 

Question: <QUESTION> <REFERENCE_IMAGE> , for image queries only. 

Event-graph components: The graph contains a Query Event 

with the target and modality; an Agent Node with the current position and budget; Object Nodes with grounding and nav-igation attributes; Frontier Nodes with exploration and navi-Prompt 3: Spatio-Temporal Event-Graph Navigation (con-tinued) 

gation attributes; image-supported Object–Object Relations ;and Recent Events describing executed decisions, trajectories, and outcomes. 

Decision rules: 

1. Select an object whose visual evidence matches the query, favouring high relevance and low path cost while verifying predicted labels against images. 2. Otherwise, select a reachable frontier by balancing explo-ration gain, path cost, semantic context, and visitation. 3. Select an earlier image only when it shows the target but no object node represents it; include the object category. 4. Use recent events as evidence, not as hard constraints against revisits. 

Runtime context: 

<SERIALIZED_EVENT_GRAPH> <ORDERED_IMAGE_LIST> 

Output format: Output exactly one of Object <ID> ,

Frontier <ID> , or Image <ID>, <CLASS> on the first line. Optional brief reasoning may follow on a new line. 

Prompt 4: Stop Verification System Prompt 

You are an indoor navigation agent verifying whether the re-quested target has been reached. Base the decision only on the query and the provided terminal observations. 

User Prompt 

Question: <QUESTION> <REFERENCE_IMAGE> , for image queries only. Inspect the surrounding observations from at most the latest five steps and determine whether the agent has reached the target required by the query. 

<TERMINAL_OBSERVATIONS> 

Output format: Answer Yes or No on the first line. Optional brief reasoning may follow on a new line. 

Prompt 5: Ambiguous Historical Identity System Prompt 

You are comparing two navigation goals from the same house-hold episode. Both refer to the same object category. Decide whether they describe the same physical instance or different instances. 

Hard rules: 

• Compare instance-specific appearance and contextual evi-dence. 

• Do not infer identity solely from the shared category name. 

• Use only information contained in the two queries and ref-erence images. 

Prompt 5: Ambiguous Historical Identity (continued) User Prompt Goal A: previously reached 

Description: <OLD_QUERY> <OLD_REFERENCE_IMAGE> , if present. 

Goal B: current query 

Description: <NEW_QUERY> <NEW_REFERENCE_IMAGE> , if present. 

Output format: Answer Yes or No on the first line. Yes means the two goals refer to the same physical instance. Optional brief reasoning may follow on a new line. 

## Case Study 

We present two successful navigation examples in Fig-ures 4 and 5. Each visualization combines the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) trajectory with corresponding RGB observa-tions, allowing inspection of how STEGNav progressively explores unseen environments, reasons over navigation tar-gets, and executes the final approach. The first case focuses on language-guided instance grounding, where the agent must identify a target object described by both semantic and spa-tial attributes. The second case illustrates object-level navi-gation, where the agent discovers the target through frontier-based exploration in an unseen environment. Together, these examples demonstrate how STEGNav integrates semantic understanding and exploration reasoning to achieve reliable multimodal navigation. 

Language-guided target grounding. Figure 4 illustrates a successful navigation trajectory given the query “refrigerator next to the kitchen cabinet.” Starting from a partially explored environment, STEGNav first selects informative frontiers to expand the explored region. After reaching the kitchen area, the agent identifies the target instance by jointly reasoning over semantic and spatial information, and finally navigates to a valid target viewpoint. This case demonstrates that the spatial axis of STEGNav enables effective target grounding by integrating object semantics with environmental context. 

Object navigation with exploration. Figure 5 presents a successful object navigation example for the query “Can you find the piano?” Without prior knowledge of the complete environment, STEGNav incrementally expands the explored area through frontier selection and identifies the target after entering the relevant room. The agent then approaches the target and terminates at a suitable viewpoint. This example highlights the ability of STEGNav to unify exploration and target-oriented navigation in unseen environments. Query: “refrigerator next to the kitchen cabinet” 

BevMap Observation 

Initial map Frontier selection Kitchen exploration Target identified Target reached Initial view Move toward the corridor Kitchen observed       

> Target (unseen) Explored Area Unexplored Area Frontier Start Position Current Position Final Position

Success 

> Target (seen)

Figure 4: Successful language-guided navigation. Given the query “refrigerator next to the kitchen cabinet” , STEGNav pro-gressively explores informative regions and grounds the target instance using semantic and spatial cues. The trajectory achieves an SPL of 0.587 with only 4 navigation steps, reaching the target within 0.40 m. BevMap Observation        

> Target (unseen) Target (seen) Explored Area Unexplored Area Frontier Start Position Current Position Final Position

Initial map Frontier selection Room exploration Target identified Target approached Target reached Initial view 

Success 

Query: “Can you find the piano?” 

Approach the room Move toward the corridor Target observed 

Figure 5: Successful object navigation. Given the query “Can you find the piano?” , STEGNav selects informative frontiers, discovers the target region, and successfully reaches the target. The trajectory achieves an SPL of 0.913 with 6 navigation steps, reaching the target within 0.97 m.