Title: Exposing the Long-tail in Embodied Urban Navigation via Scalable Learning from In-the-Wild Videos

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.16476v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 02:30:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Exposing the Long-tail in Embodied Urban Navigation via Scalable Learning from In-the-Wild Videos 

Bingyi Xia 2, Han Bao 2, Zhewei Chen 2, Hanjing Ye 2, Jingwen Yu 3, Yuhan Pang 2,Wenjun Xu 1∗, Jiankun Wang 2∗

> 1

Peng Cheng Laboratory 

> 2

Southern University of Science and Technology 

> 3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology xiaby2020@mail.sustech.edu.cn, xuwenjunwendy@gmail.com, wangjk@sustech.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Learning embodied urban navigation policies from real-world data is constrained by the cost of task-specific data collec-tion and the limited coverage of rare yet safety-critical sce-narios. To address these challenges, we present a scalable framework for learning point-goal urban navigation from web-scale in-the-wild egocentric videos while systematically ex-posing its long tail. The framework automatically annotates uncurated web videos with metric trajectories and structured navigation semantics, which are then used to train a vision-language-action policy for interpretable navigation planning. We characterize the long tail based on model performance and the distribution of perception–motion patterns, and employ reflection-based analysis to diagnose recurring failure modes. Experiments on web-video data and real-world urban navi-gation tasks demonstrate effective knowledge transfer from unconstrained videos and reveal coherent long-tail structures beyond aggregate navigation performance. 

1 Introduction 

Urban navigation is a fundamental capability for embodied agents such as delivery robots operating in public spaces. Un-like structured indoor environments or lane-governed roads, open urban spaces involve dense pedestrian interactions, ir-regular traversable regions, and implicit social conventions. Traditional modular pipelines rely on predefined representa-tions and rules, whereas recent navigation foundation models adopt end-to-end frameworks that generalize better to such scenarios (Hirose et al. 2025a; Chen et al. 2026). Following the scaling paradigm, foundation models for embodied urban navigation have grown in size, increasing the need for large-scale and diverse supervision. Their training process commonly relies on simulated data or collected hu-man demonstrations (He et al. 2025; Chen et al. 2026). How-ever, publicly available teleoperated datasets remain limited in scale, while simulated data can be generated efficiently but remains subject to the sim-to-real gap. More fundamen-tally, they are typically constructed within predefined tasks and carefully designed scenarios, inevitably limiting the cov-erage of open-world situations. Therefore, they are poorly suited to systematically exposing unforeseen tail patterns or revealing where models fail across a broader empirical dis-tribution. Further progress, however, depends not only on adding more samples but also on whether task-specific data 

> ∗

Corresponding author. 

cover the situations that constrain model performance. Long-tail coverage therefore becomes a central concern: which navigation experiences remain missing or underrep-resented and have become the bottleneck to further improve-ment? In-the-wild egocentric videos offer an alternative by capturing human navigation across naturally occurring en-vironments at scale. Prior work has demonstrated that such videos can provide effective supervision for navigation pol-icy learning (Han et al. 2025; Liu et al. 2025; Mei et al. 2026). More importantly, their broad empirical distribution supports the joint analysis of rare perception–motion pat-terns and model-dependent hard cases, making in-the-wild videos not only a scalable source of training data but also an empirical basis for identifying the task-data bottlenecks and failure modes that limit further scaling. In this work, we present a scalable framework for learn-ing point-goal urban navigation from in-the-wild egocentric videos and systematically exposing its long tail. We curate about 500 hours of street-walking videos spanning 30 cities and develop an automated pipeline to recover metric trajec-tories and generate structured navigation chain-of-thought annotations, yielding more than 500K samples. These data are used to train WILD-Nav , our proposed reasoning-aware vision-language-action model for interpretable point-goal ur-ban navigation planning. Beyond aggregate performance, we characterize the long tail by jointly analyzing the dis-tributional rarity of perception–motion patterns and model-dependent difficulty, and employ reflection-based analysis to attribute recurring failures to different reasoning and plan-ning stages. Experiments on video and real-world navigation datasets demonstrate effective knowledge transfer and reveal coherent long-tail structures without relying on predefined scenario taxonomies. We further organize the identified rare and hard episodes, together with reflection-based failure at-tribution, into a long-tail benchmark WILD-LongTail for consistent evaluation. Our contributions are threefold: 

• We develop a scalable pipeline that annotates egocen-tric in-the-wild videos of street-walking with trajectories and structured reasoning supervision for training urban navigation VLA models. 

• We construct a web-scale dataset of over 500K urban nav-igation samples and provide baseline models for bench-arXiv:2608.16476v1 [cs.RO] 17 Aug 2026 Vision-Language Model Action expert LM Head  

> CoT Reasoning Prompt Video Stream
> Traj Planning

Worldwide Web-scale City Walking Videos 

Long-tail Data Reflection Scalable Learning of VLA Models    

> CoT Meta-Action Traj Error Safety
> Teacher model Failure Taxonomy
> reflection

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed framework for scalable urban navigation VLA models. Our approach first collect worldwide web-scale street-walking videos as the dataset. A VLA model is then trained to perform end-to-end urban navigatioin planning. Finally, the reflection driven by a teacher model is introduced to analyze failure taxonomies. marking policy learning and evaluation. 

• We characterize the long-tail through model-dependent difficulty and distributional rarity in perception–motion patterns, with privileged reflection for failure attribution. 

2 Related Work 

Scalable Data for Navigation 

Navigation VLA models learn from multiple sources, includ-ing robot-collected demonstrations, simulation, and egocen-tric human videos. (He et al. 2025; Chen et al. 2026; Li et al. 2025). These sources provide complementary benefits. Real-robot data are limited by expensive collection and narrow geographic coverage (Bae et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2025). Al-though simulation enables closed-loop policy training with accurate labels, it retains a sim-to-real gap and limited pre-defined rules. SimWorld, for instance, is constructed from only 200 navigation episodes (Zhuang et al. 2025). Ego-centric videos provide a scalable alternative by recording diverse human experiences in naturally occurring environ-ments (Yang et al. 2025). Prior work has used such videos to learn navigation behaviors and spatial grounding (Hirose et al. 2025b; Pan et al. 2025; Li et al. 2026). Recent studies have leveraged Internet-sourced data to scale pretraining datasets to thousands of hours (Zheng et al. 2026; Luo et al. 2026a). More closely related to navigation, FLAME and CityNav exploit online maps and street-view imagery to learn sparse route decisions, while RoomTour3D converts Internet-sourced videos into candidate-view selec-tion tasks as training data for indoor VLN (Xu et al. 2025; Dalal et al. 2026; Han et al. 2025). However, these meth-ods only supply high-level decisions rather than executable trajectories, which cannot be directly employed by urban nav-igation VLA models. Citywalker recovers trajectories from human walking videos shot in NewYork using visual odome-try. However, substantial scene repetition leaves only approx-imately 200 hours of effective data (Liu et al. 2025). VEGA generates local 3D geometry from individual video frames and trajectories by a model-based planner, focusing primar-ily on geometric safety and 3D grounding (Seneviratne et al. 2026). These studies establish in-the-wild videos as scalable training data, but their natural distributions have received limited attention as a basis for systematically discovering long-tail patterns and model failures. 

VLA Reasoning for Navigation 

Structured textual annotations have been shown to strengthen the reasoning capabilities for navigation (Li et al. 2024; Ibn Sultan et al. 2026). In autonomous driving, AutoDrive-P3 structures reasoning into perception, prediction, and plan-ning, enabling more interpretable action planning (Ye et al. 2026). Comparable reasoning supervision remains less de-veloped for urban navigation learned from Internet-sourced videos. CityWalker only provides reconstructed trajectories, while VEGA provides object-goal labels rather than navi-gation rationales (Liu et al. 2025; Seneviratne et al. 2026). Recent urban navigation models introduce additional task-specific language instructions based on Citywalker. Urban-Nav uses landmark-grounded instructions, while SocialNav emphasizes social traversability (Mei et al. 2026; Chen et al. 2026). However, these annotations do not provide a gen-eral reasoning structure for urban navigation. Furthermore, AutoDrive-R2 demonstrates that self-reflection can validate and correct planned trajectories (Yuan et al. 2026). In-spired by them, our work aligns actions with a structured perception–analysis–planning reasoning chain and uses re-flection to trace long-tail failures to specific reasoning stages. As summarized in Table 1, it provides substantially greater scale and coverage than existing urban navigation datasets, together with structured navigation reasoning annotations. 

Long-Tail Discovery 

Most long-tail studies identify tail data through the low em-pirical frequencies of predefined classes or semantic con-cepts (Song et al. 2025; Zhao et al. 2025). Object-category frequency alone, however, does not fully capture challenging urban navigation situations determined by joint perception– motion patterns. Moreover, distributional rarity and model-dependent difficulty can overlap but need not coincide, while average performance may conceal high conditional errors on particular subpopulations (Sagawa* et al. 2020). Rare Exam-New York Tokyo Chengdu Dubai Madrid Guangzhou Sydney  

> GBR 34:46 FRA 10:13 SWE 08:49 DEU 43:31 KEN 14:51 ZAF 06:55 UAE 40:31 THA 01:20 CHN 109:19 JPN 57:01 AUS 15:40 ESP 31:27 USA 107:22 ARG 03:43 VEN 05:23

Figure 2: Geographic distribution of our in-the-wild street-walking video collection. Table 1: Comparison of urban navigation datasets based on real-world collection and in-the-wild videos. 

Dataset Duration Locations Annotation 

SCAND 8.7 h 1 -SiT 0.4 h 1 3D tracks and semantic maps GND 11 h 10 Semantic map Citywalker 200 h 1 Caption and instruction Ours 500 h 30 Navigation reasoning CoT 

ple Mining offers a related distinction by defining rareness through low feature-space density within a semantic cate-gory and filtering intrinsically difficult examples using task-specific observation-quality rules (Jiang et al. 2022). Exist-ing studies of long-tail in navigation and autonomous driving commonly rely on predefined corner-case taxonomies (Chi et al. 2025; Xu et al. 2026; He et al. 2026). Such taxonomies depend on prior knowledge of which situations are likely to be difficult. However, urban navigation lacks comparably mature long-tail taxonomies and broad natural-distribution benchmarks from which they can be derived. To address this gap, we use large-scale in-the-wild navigation videos as an empirical testbed and independently identify distribution-ally rare perception–motion patterns and high-error cases, separating data-coverage gaps from model weaknesses. Fi-nally, reflection-based methods suggest that reflective CoT and structured diagnostic reports can expose factors under-lying reasoning and planning failures (Wan et al. 2025; Luo et al. 2026b). We accordingly apply privileged reflection to characterize recurring failure attribution among the mined hard cases. 

3 Learning from In-the-Wild Videos 

We train WILD-Nav using a geographically broad collec-tion of internet-sourced egocentric videos. Our data pipeline converts these videos into urban navigation episodes. The pipeline consists of trajectory reconstruction, structured rea-soning annotation, and multi-task supervised learning. 

Problem Formulation 

We consider the foundational problem of local navigation planning in outdoor urban environments. Our objective is to learn a real-time, end-to-end policy that plans short-horizon actions without access to a pre-built map or other environ-mental priors. At time step t, the agent receives the current monocular RGB observation It ∈ RH×W ×3 and an obser-vation history Ihist  

> t

= {It−4, . . . , I t−1}. The corresponding short-range localization history is represented by the trajec-tory vector τ hist  

> t

= [ pt−4, . . . , pt], where pi ∈ R2. All positions are expressed in the egocentric ground-plane coor-dinate system. Conditioned on a local point goal gt ∈ R2, the policy plans a scale-consistent short-horizon trajectory represented by 5 discrete waypoints, ˆτ plan  

> t

= [ˆ pt+1 , . . . , ˆpt+5 ]. In ad-dition to the executable waypoint plan, WILD-Nav predicts a high-level meta-action at and generates a structured nav-igation rationale ct, following recent reasoning-aware nav-igation formulations (Chen et al. 2026; Yuan et al. 2026). During training, ct is supervised using structured rationale annotations. The complete policy is formulated as 



ct, a t, ˆτ plan 

> t



= πθ

 It, Ihist  

> t

, τ hist  

> t

, gt

 . (1) 

From In-the-Wild Videos to Navigation Episodes 

Web-scale Video Dataset. As shown in Fig. 2, our street-walking video collection spans 30 cities across 15 countries, providing broad coverage of urban appearance, pedestrian behavior, traffic and social conventions, weather, illumina-tion, crowd density, and road layout. We resize these in-the-wild egocentric videos to a uniform resolution and segment them into 5-minute clips. In-the-wild videos can contain clips that are outside the scope of our generic ground-plane navi-gation setting. We therefore use a vision-language model to identify video cuts, subject-focused clips, as well as special events such as doorway, stair, and elevator transitions. These clips are filtered out of our urban navigation dataset. 

Trajectory reconstruction. We reconstruct each standard-ized 5-minute clip using LoGeR, a long-context geometric reconstruction framework, with the Pi3X model as the visual geometry backbone (Zhang et al. 2026; Wang et al. 2026). Pi3X estimates reference-free per-frame camera poses and metric-scale depth, while LoGeR aligns overlapping chunks with memory to preserve geometric consistency. The recon-structed camera centers are aligned to a stable initial ref-erence frame and projected onto the ground plane to form a continuous trajectory. To use the reconstructed walking trajectories as pedestrian demonstrations for the point-goal navigation task, each 5-minute clip is sampled at 1 Hz and segmented into 10-frame navigation episodes comprising 5 historical and 5 future frames. Consecutive episodes are grouped into temporal blocks before dataset splitting so that strongly overlapping windows do not cross data partitions. 

Meta-action Semantic Labels. High-level meta-actions provide a compact intermediate representation between se-mantic reasoning and metric waypoint planning, as adopted in recent navigation VLA models (He et al. 2025; Chi et al. 2025). We map each valid future trajectory to one of 20 meta-actions using deterministic geometric rules based on its speed, lateral progress, and motion direction. After ex-cluding the invalid episodes, the resulting label provides a categorical summary that remains consistent with the con-tinuous waypoint trajectory. Step  ①: Automated  Web-Scale 

Video Data Annotation  "perception": [{"id": "0", "label": "pedestrian", "image_location": "left_center", "depth_location": "foreground", "description": " A pedestrian wearing a white shirt and carrying a backpack is walking ahead on the  

> left side of the path. "} … ], "analysis":
> { "prediction": " The pedestrians in the foreground are walking forward along the path.
> The robot is following them….",
> "navigation_goal": "The goal position [1.363, 2.462] requires the robot to move forward and
> significantly to the left…" }, "planning":
> { "rationale": "The robot should execute a
> 'left_translate' motion, ..."}

Qwen3.6-27B 

Over 500 hours 

From 30 cities 

Web-scale City Walking Videos  Grounding 

Dino 

𝜋 3

Structured N avigation Reasoning CoT 

Navigation 

Episodes 

Rule-based 

Data Filtering 

Step  ②: Long-tail  Discovery and Failure Attribution 

language 

Prompt 

Navigation  foundation model 

Metrics: 

• Trajectory Error 

• Joint Feature Rarity 

• CoT Component  Check 

Long-tail Data Mining                                                                       

> <privileged_check>{ "future_frames_used" :true,
> " r e f e r e n c e _ f u t u r e _ t r a j e c t o r y _ u s e d " :t r u e ,
> " h i s t o r y _ o n l y _ r e a s o n i n g _ v a l i d " :t r u e ,
> " f u t u r e _ l e a k a g e _ d e t e c t e d " :f a l s e ,
> " t r a j e c t o r y _ c o n s i s t e n c y " :" c o n s i s t e n t |
> p a r t i a l l y _ c o n s i s t e n t |i n c o n s i s t e n t " ,
> " m e t a _ a c t i o n _ c o n s i s t e n c y " :" c o n s i s t e n t |
> p a r t i a l l y _ c o n s i s t e n t |i n c o n s i s t e n t " ,
> "correction_applied" :true, "correction_type" :"none |
> waypo in t_ adjus tm e n t |s pee d_ adjus tm e nt |
> lateral_adjustment |meta_action_adjustment |
> risk_tag_adjustment", "correction_reason" :"Explain
> how privileged future information was used only to
> validate or correct the final answer .Do not introduce
> future -only facts into <perception>, <analysis>, or
> <planning> .", "final_quality" :"high |medium |low",
> " f a i l u r e _ t a g s " :[" f u t u r e _ l e a k a g e |
> w e a k _ v i s u a l _ e v i d e n c e |u n r e l i a b l e _ b b o x |
> am big uous _ m ot io n |t ra je ct o ry_ m is m a tc h |
> u n s a f e _ p a t h |p o o r _ v i s i b i l i t y |
> none" ]}</privileged_check>

Privileged Supervision 

GT trajectory 

Qwen3.6-27B 

Failure Reflection 

Failure A attribution 

pedestrian , traffic light,  car … 

Video Stream  Trajectory Reconstruction 

Meta-action Labels Figure 3: The two-stage pipeline for automated video processing. Step 1 illustrates the annotation process consisting of Qwen3.6VL-27B and other visual foundation models. Step 2 depicts the long-tail data analysis process. Long-tail samples are defined using distributional rarity and model-dependent trajectory error, and a teacher model performs reflective reasoning for structured failure attribution. 

Structured Navigation Reasoning Annotations. The re-constructed trajectories provide action supervision but do not explain why the demonstrated path is appropriate. We first use GroundingDINO (Liu et al. 2024) to detect navigation-relevant objects and map the detection coordinates and cor-responding reconstructed depth values to normalized object class, image-plane location, and depth labels. Qwen3.6VL-27B (Bai et al. 2025) is employed as an annotation teacher VLM to generate structured navigation rationales. It receives the historical and current observations and the point goal as the input observable evidence. The annotation follows a perception-analysis-planning schema (Ye et al. 2026). The grounded perception labels are organized into the perception field. The analysis field describes the predicted scene evolu-tion, the goal location, feasible traversable space, applicable interaction rules, and potential collision risks. The planning field answers a rationale for the planned meta-action and trajectory. The teacher VLM additionally receives the fu-ture observations and rule-derived meta-actions, used only as privileged verification evidence. The teacher is explicitly instructed to ground its rationale in cues observable from the historical and current inputs, preventing future-only events from appearing in the training annotation. Finally, each anno-tation is then validated for schema completeness, meta-action labels, and the ground-truth future trajectory. 

WILD-Nav Model 

WILD-Nav uses a Qwen3.5VL-4B model (Bai et al. 2025) as its backbone. The visual encoder converts the five sequential egocentric observations into image tokens, which are inter-leaved with a task prompt, alongside textual representations of the historical trajectory and point goal. The visual encoder is frozen during training. To enable reasoning-aware trajec-tory planning, a special token, <PLAN_QUERY> , is intro-duced as the interface for the action expert. Let hq ∈ R2560 

be the final normalized language-model hidden state cor-responding to this token, which aggregates the preceding Chain-of-Thought (CoT) rationale. The action expert explic-itly decodes hq into an executable continuous trajectory plan. It consists of two lightweight output heads. The meta-action head is a linear classifier: 

ˆat = softmax ( Wahq + ba) , (2) where ˆat is the predicted class-probability distribution, and 

Wa and ba are learnable parameters. The trajectory head is a four-layer multilayer perceptron with three 512-dimensional hidden layers and GELU activations: 

ˆτ plan 

t = fmlp (hq ). (3) As illustrated in Fig. 4, the pretrained vision-language backbone provides a shared reasoning representation, while the two lightweight heads decode it into the low-dimensional outputs required for precise navigation control. In the pri-mary reasoning-conditioned configuration, the model first autoregressively generates the structured rationale and ter-minates the assistant response. The <PLAN_QUERY> to-ken is then appended after the completed rationale, and one additional forward pass produces the meta-action and waypoint plan. Because hq attends to the complete gener-ated rationale, the action expert is explicitly conditioned on the model’s scene analysis. For efficiency-oriented variants, 

<PLAN_QUERY> can instead be placed before the rationale during training. Causal attention prevents it from observ-ing the subsequent text, allowing direct one-pass planning at inference while using the rationale as an auxiliary training objective. Large Language Model 

> tVideo Stream

Vision Encoder Text Tokenizer … …            

> Language Prompt & Ego Infos
> You are a professional robotic navigation agent for urban social navigation. Your task is to plan the robot's 5-second future navigation using a discrete meta-action and a trajectory. You will receive the following inputs: 1. Historical camera images for the past 4 seconds. 2. The robot historical trajectory……
> <analysis>The robot is moving forward along a narrow sidewalk. The traffic light ahead is red……<\analysis><planning>\"rationale\": The robot should continue moving forward slowly while veering slightly to the right……\"meta action\": "slow right forward"<\planning>
> Chain-of-Thought(CoT)

Action expert    

> Planned Traj
> Planning token CoT token Language token Visual token

…Figure 4: Detailed architecture of the proposed WILD-Nav model. It processes temporal video streams through a vision encoder, while a Large Language Model backbone processes the fused tokens to generate CoT reasoning. Finally, the ac-tion expert decodes the planning token into a trajectory. 

Multi-task Supervised Learning 

The model is optimized with three complementary objec-tives. First, an autoregressive language-modeling loss super-vises the structured analysis and planning rationale: 

Lcot = − X

> j∈I ans

log pθ

 ct,j | ct,<j , I t, Ihist  

> t

, τ hist  

> t

, gt

 ,

(4) where Ians denotes the index set of the generated CoT rea-soning tokens. The loss is computed only over the generated rationale, while the input prompt, padding positions, and the special <PLAN_QUERY> token are masked. Second, the meta-action head is trained using cross-entropy: 

Lact = − log ˆ at[at], (5) where at is the ground-truth meta-action label and ˆat[at] is its predicted probability. Third, the trajectory head is supervised using a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss over the five future waypoints: 

Ltraj _mlp = 15

> 5

X

> k=1

∥ˆpt+k − pt+k∥22 . (6) where ˆpt+k and pt+k denote the predicted and ground-truth waypoints, respectively. The complete objective is L = λcot Lcot + λact Lact +

λtraj Ltraj , where λcot , λact , and λtraj control the relative weights of the three objectives. The action expert uses a higher learning rate than the language-model adapters, while the visual encoder remains fixed. 

4 Long-Tail Discovery 

Characterizing the Urban Navigation Long Tail 

The internet-sourced, web-scale videos serve both as nav-igation supervision and as an empirical basis for reveal-ing its long tail beyond predefined scenario taxonomies. We represent each episode by a perception–motion pattern 

z = ϕ(x, y ), where x contains the visual observations, mo-tion history, and point goal, while y describes the meta-action and future trajectory. Let p(z) denote its occurrence proba-bility in the corpus and rf (z) = E[ℓ(f (x), y ) | Z = z] the conditional planning risk of model f . The average risk is 

R(f ) = X

> z

p(z) rf (z). (7) This decomposition explains that a low-frequency pattern can have high conditional error while contributing little to the average risk. We therefore characterize the navigation long tail along two complementary axes: rarity measures the empirical support of a perception–motion pattern, while difficulty measures the planning error of a particular model. In addition, reflection over difficult episodes examines why the model fails. These statistics characterize the empirical distribution of our web-video corpus. 

Navigation-Conditioned Rarity 

Rarity is estimated from the joint perception and motion con-figuration. Open-vocabulary object descriptions are mapped to a normalized vocabulary through lexical canonicalization. The perception representation contains normalized object categories together with their coarse image-plane and depth locations. The motion representation follows the same geo-metric rules used to construct the meta-action labels in Sec. 3. For episode i, we combine its object and spatial features with the corresponding motion configuration to obtain the joint feature. Feature rarity is measured using smoothed in-verse document frequency and aggregated into an episode-level score: 

IDF( a) = log N + 1 DF( a) + 1 , s rare  

> i

=

P 

> a∈F i

IDF( a)

p|F i| . (8) 

N is the total number of episodes, DF( a) is the number of episodes in which feature a appears, |F i| denotes the cardinality of all active joint features in the episode. The re-sulting score is higher when an episode contains more infre-quent perception–motion combinations. This representation distinguishes common semantic elements from uncommon navigation configurations. 

Difficulty and Reflection-Based Attribution 

We estimate model-dependent difficulty using the Average Displacement Error (ADE) and Final Displacement Error (FDE) of planned trajectories. ADE measures the mean Eu-clidean displacement over all waypoints, while FDE mea-sures the endpoint error relative to the local goal. We inde-pendently select the top-3% episodes under each metric and define their union as the hard set. Privileged reflection is applied only to the hard set using the same teacher VLM as in Sec. 3. In addition to the histor-ical observations and model outputs, the teacher model re-ceives future observations and the reference trajectory for ret-rospective verification. It examines whether the scene anal-ysis is supported by the observation history, whether the planning rationale agrees with the goal, and whether the tra-jectory is consistent with the meta-action. ADE, FDE, rarity scores, and hard-sample ranks are excluded from the reflec-tion prompt so that the attribution remains independent of the mining criteria. 

5 Experiments 

Experimental Setup 

Datasets. The collected in-the-wild video corpus is orga-nized into two distinct subsets. The first split provides the data for fine-tuning navigation models and is divided into 80% training and 20% test sets. The second part is reserved for long-tail discovery, including a mining set of 287820 samples and an evaluation set of 104655 samples. We further unify real-world navigation data from 3 datasets to evaluate cross-domain adaptation (Karnan et al. 2022; Bae et al. 2023; Liang et al. 2025), which produces 45096 samples and is di-vided into train and test sets. The original WILD-Nav models are trained only on the video training split, while real-world and long-tail data are introduced only in their corresponding fine-tuning experiments. 

Baselines and model variants. We compare with Urban-Nav (Mei et al. 2026) and SocialNav (Chen et al. 2026), as they are the closest recent methods that learn visual ur-ban navigation planning from scalable human navigation data. We denote the publicly released SocialNav weights as SocialNav-origin, and additionally fine-tune both UrbanNav and SocialNav on our training data. The proposed method WILD-Nav is evaluated in two variants. WILD-Nav-inst directly computes the planning outputs from instruction-conditioned features, whereas WILD-Nav-think first gener-ates the structured perception–analysis–planning rationale and then computes the planning outputs. All experiments are conducted on NVIDIA V100 GPUs with 32 GB of memory. 

Metrics. We report ADE and FDE to evaluate metric tra-jectory planning accuracy. Following UrbanNav and Social-Nav (Mei et al. 2026; Chen et al. 2026), we additionally report maximum angular orientation error (MAOE), com-puted by averaging the largest waypoint-wise direction error of each episode. Meta-action accuracy is reported only for the WILD-Nav variants because the baselines do not support meta-action prediction. 

Navigation Planning Results 

Video Test Set. We first evaluate urban navigation VLA models using in-the-wild egocentric videos to examine whether such videos can serve as scalable human navigation demonstrations. WILD-Nav consistently outperforms both baselines across all trajectory metrics. Even compared with the stronger SocialNav variant, WILD-Nav-inst reduces all three planning errors by at least 53.4%, while achieving a 47.8% reduction in FDE over UrbanNav. WILD-Nav-think further improves upon WILD-Nav-inst, reducing ADE and FDE by 8.5% and 4.2%, respectively. The comparisons re-veal the respective contributions of CoT data and model de-sign. The further advantage of WILD-Nav over the baselines mainly shows its improved model design. WILD-Nav-think performs best across all trajectory metrics, suggesting that Table 2: Comparison of navigation planning results on the video and real-world test sets. – denotes the unavailable test.                                                                

> Method Meta(%) ↑ADE(m) ↓FDE(m) ↓MAOE( ◦)↓
> Video Test Set
> UrbanNav –0.157 0.136 6.30 SocialNav-origin –0.906 1.123 16.53 SocialNav –0.470 0.728 12.65 WILD-Nav-inst 96.5 0.094 0.071 5.90 WILD-Nav-think 93.4 0.086 0.068 5.32
> Real-World Test Set: weights from video dataset
> UrbanNav –0.867 1.493 13.92 SocialNav –3.499 5.824 19.49 WILD-Nav-inst 93.4 0.953 1.493 7.36 WILD-Nav-think 93.3 0.619 0.834 7.14
> Real-World Test Set: fine-tuned by real-data
> UrbanNav –0.257 0.286 8.29 SocialNav –2.901 4.837 16.08 WILD-Nav-inst 89.13 0.206 0.127 4.49 020 40 60 joint rarity score 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 density Rare 5%: 34.9 Rarity 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 error (m) 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 density ADE 3%: 0.270 FDE 3%: 0.242 ADE FDE

Figure 5: Overview of long-tail discovery through feature rarity and model-dependent difficulty. Left: Distribution of joint perception–motion rarity scores. Right: Distributions of ADE and FDE. structured reasoning provides useful context for continuous waypoint generation. 

Real-World Test Set. We evaluate two settings on the Real-World Test Set: direct transfer using weights learned from the video dataset, and domain adaptation by fine-tuning the mod-els on the real-world training split. The directly transferred models exhibit substantially higher errors, indicating a con-siderable domain gap caused by differences in camera view-points and motion constraints. After real-world fine-tuning, WILD-Nav-inst achieves the best trajectory performance, reducing FDE and MAOE by 55.6% and 45.8%, respec-tively, compared with the next-best UrbanNav. Nevertheless, its ADE and FDE remain higher than those on the Video Test Set, suggesting that fine-tuning does not completely close the domain gap. A likely reason is that the real-world training set is substantially smaller than the video dataset and therefore covers fewer visual and motion patterns. 

Long-Tail Evaluation Protocol 

Figure 5 summarizes the rarity and model-error distributions, their overlap, and reflection-based failure attribution. Both the rarity score and error distributions show a right-tailed dis-tribution as depicted in Figure 5. We operationally define the samples with top-5% rarity scores as rare perception–motion UMAP-1 UMAP-2 (a) Action Rule Predict Risk Plan Shape C18 C47 C60 C105 C141 C155  

> −1 13(b)

Figure 6: Failure attribution obtained by privileged reflec-tion over the hard set. (a) Visualization of six representa-tive HDBSCAN clusters in the hard set; gray points denote all remaining samples. (b) Cluster-specific reflection failure patterns. Bubble size represents failure support, and color indicates enrichment over the global baseline. Table 3: Ablation of incremental fine-tuning data on the Long-Tail Test Set. The fixed tail is the union of the worst 3% ADE and FDE samples selected by WILD-Nav-inst.                                

> Test-all Test-hard Method ADE ↓FDE ↓ADE ↓FDE ↓Meta (%) ↑
> WILD-Nav-inst 0.094 0.074 0.286 0.247 94.88 +Random 0.091 0.072 0.277 0.231 95.10 +Hard 0.121 0.102 0.230 0.165 96.83
> +Hard+Random 0.093 0.079 0.217 0.160 96.73

patterns. Difficulty is defined according to the performance of WILD-Nav-inst, yielding a hard set that covers 4.92% of the whole Long-Tail Mining Set. For the coverage between them, 24.18% of hard episodes are rare, while 14.48% of rare episodes are hard. Their joint analysis therefore distinguishes common–hard cases revealing systematic model limitations, and rare–hard cases combining weak data support with high model error. To diagnose the failure mechanisms of difficult samples, we first cluster the samples using the joint feature and as-sociate each cluster with the reflection failures. The joint features were first compressed using SVD and mapped to a neighborhood-preserving latent space using UMAP. HDB-SCAN was then applied to discover variable-density scene clusters. Fig. 6 (a) visualizes six representative scene clus-ters, while (b) reports their failure enrichment relative to the global baseline. Distinct failure patterns emerge: dense-pedestrian stopping scenes (C18) are dominated by planning and trajectory-shape errors; scooter–sign contexts (C47) ex-hibit rule and action errors; traffic-sign scenes (C60) am-plify rule violations; and scooter or cyclist interactions (C105/C141) primarily expose prediction and collision-risk failures. These results indicate that model failures are scene-dependent rather than uniformly distributed. The identified patterns should be interpreted as statistically supported local associations rather than exhaustive causal categories. 1 23 45 6

Figure 7: Real-world navigation performance of our VLA model. Our model generates safe and reasonable trajectories (red) for various navigation tasks. 

Results on the Long-Tail Test Set 

We evaluate whether model-dependent hard examples pro-vide more effective fine-tuning supervision than randomly sampled data. For evaluation, the same rule is applied once to the predictions of WILD-Nav-inst on the Long-Tail Test Set. All fine-tuned models are evaluated on these same sam-ple IDs without redefining the tail. Table 3 compares the base model with three incremental fine-tuning strategies. Random fine-tuning mainly preserves overall performance but provides limited gains on the fixed tail. Hard fine-tuning improves tail performance more effectively but degrades the full test set. Further adding random samples provides the best balance by preserving overall performance while achieving the lowest tail errors. This indicates that hard examples pro-vide targeted supervision for failure cases, whereas replay helps retain the broader navigation distribution. 

Qualitative Real-World Results. We deploy the fine-tuned WILD-Nav-inst model on a mobile robot and conduct navigation trials in diverse outdoor urban environments. Fig-ure 7 presents representative planning results. Across pedes-trian interactions, intersection turns, sidewalk obstacles, and signalized crossings, WILD-Nav generates trajectories that remain within traversable regions or surrounding constraints. More details are in the Appendix. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented a scalable framework that converts 500 hours of in-the-wild street-walking videos across 30 cities into more than 500K navigation samples, and used these data to train WILD-Nav, a reasoning-aware VLA model for point-goal ur-ban navigation. It achieves accurate and interpretable point-goal planning on both video and real-world data. Beyond ag-gregate evaluation, our joint analysis of perception–motion rarity and model-dependent difficulty exposes distinct long-tail structures, while privileged reflection attributes difficult cases to recurring reasoning and planning failures. Targeted fine-tuning further improves performance on the fixed tail, with replay data helping preserve overall capability. These results establish in-the-wild videos as both scalable naviga-tion supervision and an empirical basis for identifying the data and model bottlenecks that limit urban navigation. References 

Bae, J. W.; Kim, J.; Yun, J.; Kang, C.; Choi, J.; Kim, C.; Lee, J.; Choi, J.; and Choi, J. W. 2023. SiT Dataset: Socially In-teractive Pedestrian Trajectory Dataset for Social Navigation Robots. In Oh, A.; Naumann, T.; Globerson, A.; Saenko, K.; Hardt, M.; and Levine, S., eds., Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , volume 36, 24552–24563. Curran Associates, Inc. Bai, S.; Cai, Y.; Chen, R.; Chen, K.; Chen, X.; Cheng, Z.; Deng, L.; Ding, W.; Gao, C.; Ge, C.; et al. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 .Chen, Z.; Guo, Y.; Chu, Z.; Luo, M.; Shen, Y.; Sun, M.; Hu, J.; Xie, S.; Kuan, Y.; Shi, P.; Gu, Z.; Liu, L.; Han, H.; Wu, X.; Xu, M.; and Zhang, Y. 2026. SocialNav: Training Human-Inspired Foundation Model for Socially-Aware Embodied Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 28796– 28806. Chi, H.; Gao, H.-a.; Liu, Z.; Liu, J.; Liu, C.; Li, J.; Yang, K.; Yu, Y.; Wang, Z.; Li, W.; Wang, L.; HU, X.; SUN, H.; Zhao, H.; and Zhao, H. 2025. Impromptu VLA: Open Weights and Open Data for Driving Vision-Language-Action Models. In Belgrave, D.; Zhang, C.; Lin, H.; Pascanu, R.; Koniusz, P.; Ghassemi, M.; and Chen, N., eds., Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 38. Curran Associates, Inc. Dalal, D.; Mishra, U.; Ahuja, N.; and Jojic, N. 2026. City Navigation in the Wild: Exploring Emergent Navigation from Web-Scale Knowledge in MLLMs. arXiv:2512.15933. Han, M.; Ma, L.; Zhumakhanova, K.; Radionova, E.; Zhang, J.; Chang, X.; Liang, X.; and Laptev, I. 2025. RoomTour3D: Geometry-Aware Video-Instruction Tuning for Embodied Navigation. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 27586–27596. He, H.; Ma, Y.; Squicciarini, B.; Wu, W.; and Zhou, B. 2025. From seeing to experiencing: Scaling navigation foun-dation models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22028 .He, H.; Ma, Y.; Squicciarini, B.; Wu, W.; and Zhou, B. 2026. Learning Sidewalk Autopilot from Multi-Scale Imitation with Corrective Behavior Expansion. arXiv:2603.22527. Hirose, N.; Glossop, C.; Shah, D.; and Levine, S. 2025a. OmniVLA: An omni-modal vision-language-action model for robot navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19480 .Hirose, N.; Glossop, C.; Sridhar, A.; Mees, O.; and Levine, S. 2025b. LeLaN: Learning A Language-Conditioned Naviga-tion Policy from In-the-Wild Video. In Agrawal, P.; Kroemer, O.; and Burgard, W., eds., Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 270 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 666–688. PMLR. Ibn Sultan, R.; Zhu, H.; Zhou, X.; Li, C.; Khanduri, P.; Bro-canelli, M.; and Zhu, D. 2026. WalkGPT: Grounded Vision-Language Conversation with Depth-Aware Segmentation for Pedestrian Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 40085–40095. Jiang, C. M.; Najibi, M.; Qi, C. R.; Zhou, Y.; and Anguelov, D. 2022. Improving the intra-class long-tail in 3d detec-tion via rare example mining. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 158–175. Springer. Karnan, H.; Nair, A.; Xiao, X.; Warnell, G.; Pirk, S.; Toshev, A.; Hart, J.; Biswas, J.; and Stone, P. 2022. Socially Compli-Ant Navigation Dataset (SCAND): A Large-Scale Dataset of Demonstrations for Social Navigation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(4): 11807–11814. Li, A.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Li, M.; Qi, Y.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, Z.; and Wang, H. 2025. UrbanVLA: A Vision-Language-Action Model for Urban Micromobility. arXiv:2510.23576. Li, C.; Han, R.; Hsu, J.; Liang, Y.; Dhawan, R.; Wu, J.; Yang, M.-H.; and Wang, X. E. 2026. SAW-Bench: Learning Situated Awareness in the Real World. arXiv:2602.16682. Li, J.; Padmakumar, A.; Sukhatme, G.; and Bansal, M. 2024. VLN-Video: Utilizing Driving Videos for Outdoor Vision-and-Language Navigation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, 18517–18526. Liang, J.; Das, D.; Song, D.; Shuvo, M. N. H.; Durrani, M.; Taranath, K.; Penskiy, I.; Manocha, D.; and Xiao, X. 2025. Gnd: Global Navigation Dataset With Multi-Modal Percep-tion and Multi-Category Traversability in Outdoor Campus Environments. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2383–2390. Liu, S.; Zeng, Z.; Ren, T.; Li, F.; Zhang, H.; Yang, J.; Jiang, Q.; Li, C.; Yang, J.; Su, H.; et al. 2024. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In European conference on computer vision , 38– 55. Springer. Liu, X.; Li, J.; Jiang, Y.; Sujay, N.; Yang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Abanes, J.; Zhang, J.; and Feng, C. 2025. CityWalker: Learn-ing Embodied Urban Navigation from Web-Scale Videos. In 

2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 6875–6885. Luo, H.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, W.; Yuan, H.; Feng, Y.; Xu, H.; Zheng, S.; and Lu, Z. 2026a. Joint-Aligned Latent Action: Towards Scalable VLA Pretraining in the Wild. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 35047–35058. Luo, Y.; Li, F.; Chen, Q.; Xu, S.; Liu, J.; Song, Z.; Yang, Z.-x.; and Wen, F. 2026b. Unleashing VLA Potentials in Autonomous Driving via Explicit Learning from Failures. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 24833–24842. Mei, Y.; Yang, Y.; Guo, L.; Wang, Q.; Yu, M.-M.; He, X.; Wu, W.; and Liu, J. 2026. UrbanNav: Learning Language-Guided Embodied Urban Navigation from Web-Scale Human Trajec-tories. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, 18505–18513. Pan, B.; Harley, A. W.; Engelmann, F.; Liu, C. K.; and Guibas, L. J. 2025. LookOut: Real-World Humanoid Egocentric Nav-igation. In 2025 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 24977–24988. Sagawa*, S.; Koh*, P. W.; Hashimoto, T. B.; and Liang, P. 2020. Distributionally Robust Neural Networks. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Seneviratne, G.; Abeysinghe, Y.; An, J.; Shende, V.; and Manocha, D. 2026. VEGA: Learning Navigation VLAs from In-the-Wild Egocentric Video with Geometric Trajectory Su-pervision. arXiv:2606.18426. Song, M.; Qu, X.; Zhou, J.; and Cheng, Y. 2025. From Head to Tail: Towards Balanced Representation in Large Vision-Language Models through Adaptive Data Calibration. In 

2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 9434–9444. Wan, Z.; Dou, Z.; Liu, C.; Zhang, Y.; Cui, D.; Zhao, Q.; Shen, H.; Xiong, J.; Xin, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Tao, C.; He, Y.; Zhang, M.; and Yan, S. 2025. SRPO: Enhancing Multimodal LLM Rea-soning via Reflection-Aware Reinforcement Learning. In Belgrave, D.; Zhang, C.; Lin, H.; Pascanu, R.; Koniusz, P.; Ghassemi, M.; and Chen, N., eds., Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , volume 38, 153676–153713. Curran Associates, Inc. Wang, Y.; Zhou, J.; Zhu, H.; Chang, W.; Zhou, Y.; Li, Z.; Chen, J.; Pang, J.; Shen, C.; and He, T. 2026. $\pi^3$: Permutation-Equivariant Visual Geometry Learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations .Xu, R.; Lin, H.; Jeon, W.; Feng, H.; Zou, Y.; Sun, L.; Gorman, J.; Tolstaya, K.; Tang, S.; White, B.; Sapp, B.; Tan, M.; Hwang, J.-J.; and Anguelov, D. 2026. WOD-E2E: Waymo Open Dataset for End-to-End Driving in Challenging Long-tail Scenarios. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 3709– 3718. Xu, Y.; Pan, Y.; Liu, Z.; and Wang, H. 2025. Flame: Learn-ing to navigate with multimodal llm in urban environments. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 39, 9005–9013. Yang, R.; Yu, Q.; Wu, Y.; Yan, R.; Li, B.; Cheng, A.-C.; Zou, X.; Fang, Y.; Cheng, X.; Qiu, R.-Z.; Yin, H.; Liu, S.; Han, S.; Lu, Y.; and Wang, X. 2025. EgoVLA: Learning Vision-Language-Action Models from Egocentric Human Videos. arXiv:2507.12440. Ye, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Lin, J.; Sun, S.; Peng, C.; and Gao, W. 2026. $AutoDrive\text{-}P^3$: Unified Chain of Percep-tion–Prediction–Planning Thought via Reinforcement Fine-Tuning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Yuan, Z.; Qian, C.; Tang, J.; Chen, R.; Song, Z.; Sun, L.; Chu, X.; Cai, Y.; Zhang, D.; and Li, S. 2026. AutoDrive-R²: Incentivizing Reasoning and Self-Reflection Capacity for VLA Model in Autonomous Driving. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Zhang, J.; Herrmann, C.; Hur, J.; Sun, C.; Yang, M.-H.; Cole, F.; Darrell, T.; and Sun, D. 2026. Loger: Long-context ge-ometric reconstruction with hybrid memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03269 .Zhao, S.; Wen, X.; Liu, J.; Ma, C.; Yuan, C.; and Qi, X. 2025. Learning from Neighbors: Category Extrapolation for Long-Tail Learning. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 30483–30492. Zheng, R.; Niu, D.; Xie, Y.; Wang, J.; Xu, M.; Jiang, Y.; Cas-tañeda, F.; Hu, F.; Tan, Y. L.; Fu, L.; Darrell, T.; Huang, F.; Zhu, Y.; Xu, D.; and Fan, L. 2026. EgoScale: Scaling Dex-terous Manipulation with Diverse Egocentric Human Data. arXiv:2602.16710. Zhuang, Y.; Ren, J.; Ye, X.; Shen, J.; zhang, r.; Yue, T.; Faayez, M.; He, X.; Zhang, X.; Ma, Z.; Qin, L.; Hu, Z.; and Shu, T. 2025. SimWorld-Robotics: Synthesizing Photorealis-tic and Dynamic Urban Environments for Multimodal Robot Navigation and Collaboration. In Belgrave, D.; Zhang, C.; Lin, H.; Pascanu, R.; Koniusz, P.; Ghassemi, M.; and Chen, N., eds., Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 38, 51854–51895. Curran Associates, Inc.