Title: Low-Resolution Perception for Robotic Packing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.25874v1

Published Time: Thu, 27 Aug 2026 01:08:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
> ©2026 the authors. This work has been accepted to IFAC for publication under a Creative Commons Licence CC-BY-NC-ND.

# Low-Resolution Perception for Robotic Packing 

Giuseppe Fabio Preziosa ∗ Federico Vignoni ∗

Chiara Castellano ∗ Marco Faroni ∗

Andrea Maria Zanchettin ∗ Paolo Rocco ∗∗ The authors are with Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32. Milano (Italy). e-mail: (giuseppefabio.preziosa, federico.vignoni, chiara2.castellano, marco.faroni, andreamaria.zanchettin, paolo.rocco)@polimi.it 

Abstract: This work tackles the problem of scalable perception for robotic packing with low-cost, low-resolution depth sensing. We propose a framework where reconstruction cues drive next-view selection and grasp evidence updates a per-object stability estimate, jointly deciding 

what to acquire next and when to grasp. During the reconstruction, a low-resolution Next Best View (NBV) strategy explicitly avoids redundant views while preserving task-relevant geometry. We validate the approach in two steps: (i) an ablation study of the utility function under very low resolution, and (ii) a full end-to-end evaluation across policies, showing how low-resolution 

perception is a practical, scalable option for robotic packing. 

Keywords: Robot perception and sensing, Robotic grasping and manipulation, Smart production and logistics in manufacturing, Robotics in manufacturing systems. 1. INTRODUCTION Robotic packing lies at the intersection of flexible manufac-turing and modern logistics. The task—detecting incoming items, estimating size, selecting and executing grasps, and placing objects into suitable containers—remains challeng-ing despite advances in perception. While the workflow is consistent across applications, variability in object geom-etry and arrangement makes solutions broadly transfer-able. In practice, however, container selection and object arrangement still rely on tacit knowledge, limiting repeata-bility and consistency. Prior work has largely focused on maximizing in-box spatial efficiency: Wang and Hauser (2019) optimize placement under stability constraints, while Wang and Hauser (2021) extend this to both known and unknown objects, typically assuming high-resolution sensing and offline planning. More recent efforts target deployability, using minimalistic grippers (Shome et al. (2019)) and RGB cameras (Hong et al. (2020)) to reduce system complexity. In this context, we investigate whether effective packing requires detailed perception or only task-relevant information, and how far perception can be re-duced without compromising throughput and reliability. Low-resolution sensing has proven effective in other do-mains (e.g., safety) Ceriani et al. (2013), but object un-derstanding remains challenging due to limited detail and the need for multiple viewpoints. However, robotic packing does not require full 3D reconstruction: task-sufficient esti-mates of object dimensions are often enough for container selection and placement. Prior work shows that partial re-constructions (25–30%) can support robust manipulation Alliegro et al. (2022); Ten Pas et al. (2017). The challenge becomes more pronounced in multi-object scenarios, where multiple acquisitions are needed and efficient decisions about which object to scan and when it is ready to pick are critical for throughput. Traditional Next Best View (NBV) strategies, designed for high-fidelity reconstruction, often lead to redundant poses and limited viewpoint diversity under low resolution. Moreover, dense but partial recon-structions can mislead grasp synthesis, producing grasps that fail on the full object. To address this, we extend our previous work Preziosa et al. (2025) by proposing an end-to-end perception–planning pipeline for multi-object robotic packing with low-cost, low-resolution depth sen-sors. Specifically, we integrate the LR–NBV strategy from Preziosa et al. (2025), which reduces redundancy through density-aware exploration, within a framework that fuses grasp hypotheses to determine whether an object is ready for picking or requires further views. A video overview is available at https://youtu.be/9uRI0bNqhDk .2. RELATED WORK The task of selecting the viewpoint that maximizes infor-mation about a scene is known as the Next Best View 

(NBV) problem. As denoted by Scott et al. (2003), NBV methods are commonly divided into model-based and 

model-free approaches. Model-based methods validate a known object model against observations, while model-free methods—our focus—assume no prior knowledge and iteratively reconstruct the scene. These pipelines typically rely on volumetric representations, such as probabilistic voxel grids (e.g., OctoMap), where space is discretized into free, occupied, and unknown regions. Given a set of sampled poses, the most informative one is typically selected through a utility function, often based on ray cast-ing. These utilities quantify informativeness and can be adapted to both task objectives and hardware constraints. arXiv:2608.25874v1 [cs.RO] 26 Aug 2026 Fig. 1. Pipeline overview. The Object Manager selects pick or view . For view , a target object is chosen (Explo-ration/Exploitation) and LR–NBV plans the next pose. The Grasp Generator outputs scored 6-DoF grasps. The loop repeats until all objects are removed. Most classical approaches (Selin et al. (2019)) focus on exploration gain, i.e., maximizing unobserved space. Sev-eral work incorporates hardware-aware terms, such as min-imizing robot motion or favoring optimal sensor incidence angles (Massios et al. (1998)). However, these formulations are not well suited to low-resolution sensing. Sparse obser-vations make nearby viewpoints hard to distinguish, lead-ing to similar utility scores and redundant acquisitions. While redundancy can be mitigated through penalties on revisited areas as Naazare et al. (2022), such strategies are less effective in object-centric scenarios, where local aliasing between neighboring poses remains a challenge. To address this, we prioritize under-sampled regions while reducing overlap with already observed volumes. Beyond reconstruction-driven NBV, recent work integrates grasp planning into view selection. Gualtieri and Platt (2017) rank candidate grasps using a view database and alignment heuristics, but their reliance on prior data limits generalization and can bias exploration under partial ob-servations. Similarly, Arruda et al. (2016) refine geometry near predicted contacts for multi-finger grasping, requiring accurate local surface information that is difficult to obtain with low-resolution sensing. In cluttered environments, Morrison et al. (2019) combine pixel-wise grasp proposals with information gain, though their effectiveness relies on high-quality RGB-D data. More closely related, Breyer et al. (2022) propose a closed-loop NBV strategy that iteratively refines grasp hypotheses until a stable grasp is found. This stability criterion remains appealing under low-resolution sensing, as grasp quality can improve with additional views. We adopt a similar principle but extend it to multi-object packing, introducing an object-centric scheduler that determines which item to observe or pick. Unlike Breyer et al. (2022), which assumes known object properties, our method estimates object size and pose online from minimal initial observations and updates them as new data become available. 3. METHOD OVERVIEW We aim to minimize the number of acquisitions—and thus the makespan—by deciding at each iteration whether to refine an object reconstruction ( view ) or to execute a grasp ( pick ). This decision is taken by the Object Manager (Sec. 3.2) based on two inputs: the current geometric state and the grasp hypotheses. The former is represented by an OctoMap Mt and its associated point cloud Pt, both updated whenever a new observation arrives. If view is chosen, LR–NBV (Sec. 3.3) selects the next pose xT ∈

SE(3); the sensor at xT returns D(xT ) = {pi}Ri=1 ⊆ R3,where pi are the 3D points measured at pose xT and R is set by the sensor resolution. The observation is fused to update Mt = F(Mt−1, D (xT )) and the derived Pt, and thus the per-object reconstructions extracted from Mt.In parallel, at every map update, the Grasp Generator (Sec. 3.1) takes as input the latest Pt to propose and score candidate grasps; these cues feed back into the Object Manager to arbitrate the pick–vs–view decision at the next iteration. Fig. 1 depicts the flow and module interactions. 

3.1 Grasp Generator 

Whenever the occupancy map Mt is updated with a new acquisition D(xT ), its point cloud Pt is fed to this module, which returns a list of candidate grasps: 

Gt = G(Pt) = { gt, 1, . . . , g t,N t }, gt,m = ( Tt,m , q t,m ),

where each grasp gt,m consists of a 6-DoF pose Tt,m ∈

SE(3) and an associated quality score qt,m ∈ R. The Grasp Generator operates directly on the point cloud and can be either purely geometric or learning-based; in both cases, it estimates plausible gripper poses and assigns a score that reflects grasp stability and feasibility (e.g., antipodal consistency, collision risk via Mt, and reachability). This procedure is executed at every map update so that Gt

stays aligned with the evolving scene. 3.2 Object Manager 

The Object Manager fuses geometric evidence and grasp hypotheses across iterations to decide what to view and 

when to pick . Its guiding idea is stability by re-observation :in low-resolution settings, early reconstructions may be partial and induce grasps that reflect only local geometry and are thus unreliable. By monitoring how grasp propos-als evolve as the map improves, the module favors grasps that reappear consistently over time and treats them as more trustworthy. To evaluate this stability and arbitrate between further reconstruction (view) and grasping (pick), the Object Manager processes the raw point cloud Pt

from the occupancy map Mt and the global grasp set produced by the Grasp Generator. With that information, it maintains the scene objects as: 

Ot = {o(1)  

> t

, . . . , o (Nt) 

> t

}, o (n) 

> t

=  B(n) 

> t

, Gobj  

> t

(o(n) 

> t

), S t(o(n) 

> t

)

where B(n) 

> t

is the oriented bounding box (extent and pose), 

Gobj  

> t

(o(n) 

> t

) is the per-object grasp list for o(n) 

> t

, with generic entry ( To,j , q o,j , c o,j , ˆso,j ). The first two terms ( To,j , q o,j )are as introduced in Sec. 3.1; co,j ∈ R is an observation counter tracking re-occurrences of equivalent grasps; and the grasp score ˆ so,j ∈ R accounts for both the current quality and the counter, with the specific update detailed in Alg. 1. Finally, St(o(n) 

> t

) ∈ R denotes the object-level stability used for the pick/view decision. The module comprises two stages: Object Identification, and Pick-or-View Arbitration. Object identification is performed directly from the raw point cloud Pt, without prior knowledge of object pose or size. The occupancy map Mt is updated by classifying vox-els as free, occupied, or uncertain, enabling segmentation of the scene. We apply DBSCAN by Deng (2020) to cluster points based on density. Each cluster defines an object hypothesis, enclosed in an oriented bounding box (OBB). The OBB encodes object extent, defines a dynamic region of interest (ROI) for view planning, and supports collision checking. Temporal consistency is enforced by matching objects in Ot and Ot−1 using centroid displacement and bounding-box overlap, allowing tracking, detection of new objects, and handling of occlusions. The pick-or-view arbitration performs the core decision of the Object Manager. It first collects representative object poses (line 2) and associates each incoming grasp (Ti, q i) to the nearest object via a pose–distance criterion, then checks for matches with previously stored grasps 

(lines 3–6) . If a match is found, the observation counter 

c and stability ˆ s are updated (lines 8–9) ; otherwise, a new entry is added (line 11) . Object-level stability is then computed by aggregating grasp scores (lines 14– 15) . If an object stability exceeds τstab , it is selected for picking (lines 17–20) ; otherwise, a view action is triggered 

(lines 23–27) . In this case, the target object Oview is selected by πview : Exploration chooses the least-stable object, while Exploitation selects the most-stable one, and 

View (Oview ) is executed (line 27) via LR–NBV (Sec. 3.3). 

3.3 Low Resolution Next Best View 

This module describes the view action used in Alg. 1 

(line 27) by the Object Manager. Given the view target 

Fig. 2. Ray validity and Exploration gain. Low resolution leads to similar scores and redundant views. Image from Preziosa et al. (2025). 

Oview , the view–planning module evaluates candidate sen-sor poses xT to decide the next acquisition. Candidates are sampled on a viewing sphere centered at Oview . The selection among candidate poses is guided by the LR– NBV utility introduced in our prior work Preziosa et al. (2025), which we report here for completeness. The utility is tailored for low-resolution sensing: it balances explo-ration of uncertain space with a preference for sparse, under-represented regions, thereby discouraging revisits. Formally, it is a weighted sum of two gains—the Explo-ration gain ( Ge) and the Density gain ( Gd): 

U (xn) = weGe(xT ) + wdGd(xT ) (1) with we, w d > 0 indicating the per-gain weights; these are adjustable to balance the contributions of each term for a given sensing modality. Both gains rely on a ray-casting procedure that emulates the sensor at a candidate pose. Each ray r ∈ R (xn, FoV , res) originates from the sensor pose xT and is given by r(t) = o + td, where o ∈ R3 is the origin, d ∈ R3 the direction, and t the distance along 

Algorithm 1 Pick Or View                                                                         

> Require: Ot,Gt, thresholds τd, τ g, τ stab
> view policy πview ∈ { Explore ,Exploit }
> 1: while |O t|>0do
> 2: Tobj ←[ ¯Tt(o) for o∈ O t]
> 3: for all (Ti, q i)∈Gtdo
> 4: n⋆←FindNearest (Ti,Tobj ;τd)
> 5: Tgrasp ←[Tn⋆,j for ( Tn⋆,j ,·)∈ G obj
> t(o(n⋆)
> t) ]
> 6: j⋆←FindNearest (Ti,Tgrasp ;τg)
> 7: if j⋆̸=none then
> 8: cn⋆,j ⋆←cn⋆,j ⋆+ 1
> 9: ˆsn⋆,j ⋆←qn⋆,j ⋆cn⋆,j ⋆
> 10: else
> 11: add ( Ti, q i, c =1 ,ˆs=qi) to Gobj
> t(o(n⋆)
> t)
> 12: end if
> 13: end for
> 14: for all o∈ O tdo
> 15: St(o)←

P                                         

> (T ,q,c, ˆs)∈G obj
> t(o)ˆs
> 16: end for
> 17: Rt← { o∈ O t|St(o)≥τstab }
> 18: if Rt̸=∅then
> 19: Opick ←arg max o∈R tSt(o)
> 20: Pick (Opick )
> 21: else
> 22: if πview =Explore then
> 23: Oview ←arg min o∈O tSt(o)
> 24: else
> 25: Oview ←arg max o∈O tSt(o)
> 26: end if
> 27: View (Oview )
> 28: end if
> 29: end while

the ray. Let t∗ be the first point where r(t) intersects the object o(i) 

> t

, we define ray validity as: 

V (r, t ) = 

1 if r(t) ∩ ROI ̸ = ∅ and ∃t∗ ≤ t : r(t∗) ∈ o(i)   

> t,
> 0otherwise.

(2) As illustrated in Fig. 2a, a ray segment is valid only within the ROI and when not occluded by the object, reflecting that regions beyond occlusions are not observable; thus only visible workspace portions contribute to reconstruc-tion. With this, the Exploration gain Ge(xT ) is: 

Ge(xT ) = X 

> r∈R (xT,FoV ,res) 1

X 

> tk=0

V (r, t k)W (r, t k) (3) where tk are uniformly spaced samples between t = 0 and t = 1. The term W (r, t k) measures the contribution of each segment to volumetric exploration with traversed voxel volume as in Selin et al. (2019). Combining valid-ity and volumetric terms focuses acquisitions on high-uncertainty areas, maximizing novel information. How-ever, as shown in Fig. 2b, under low-resolution sensing, nearby poses can yield identical Ge. Since Ge ignores local point density, it may promote redundant views. To address this, we define the Density gain: 

Gd(xT ) = X 

> r∈R (xT,FoV ,res) 1

X 

> tk=0

V (r, t k) · 11 + ρ(r, t k) (4) Here, ρ(r, t k) is the number of object points within a spherical neighborhood of radius rd centered at r(tk). This downweights rays through dense areas and prioritizes under-sampled regions, thereby reducing redundancy. 4. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION We experimentally validate two aspects of the method. Study A (Sec. 4.1) assesses the effectiveness of the pro-posed low-resolution utility in selecting informative poses under severe sensing constraints. Study B (Sec. 4.2) eval-uates the behavior of the full pipeline with the Object Manager—i.e., when to keep reconstructing or pick. 

4.1 Study A: Utility Function Validation 

This study builds on our previous validation (Preziosa et al. (2025)). We compare LR-NBV with a standard NBV 

method that uses the same Exploration gain (Sec. 3.3) but omits Density gain , reflecting typical reconstruction-oriented NBV methods. Since the experiment targets re-construction only , both methods use the same marginal-gain stopping criterion: at iteration t, for pose xTt with utility Ut, the marginal gain ∆ t = Ut(xTt )−Ut−1(xTt−1 ) is computed, and acquisition stops when ∆ t ≤ εmg . As a sec-ond reference, we include a heuristic ( HEU ) that samples 13 viewpoints along an ellipse centered on the workspace, assuming known object pose. Each of the four objects in Fig. 3 is reconstructed five times with all methods. Table 1. Study A parameters.       

> sampled poses wewdOctoMap res[m] 50 500 0.05 0.01

Experiments were carried out on a real UR5e manipulator equipped with a VL53L8CX time-of-flight sensor mounted on the end effector. The device has a 45 ◦ × 45 ◦ field of view and an 8 ×8 pixel array, yielding extremely sparse observations. Computation ran on a Lenovo Yoga Pro 7i Gen 9 (Intel ® Core ™ i7-13700H, 32 GB RAM). Table 1 reports the parameter values used in all experiments. We evaluate performance using four metrics: (i) bounding-box dimensions with intersection-over-union (IoU) to quantify reconstruction accuracy—relevant for container-size selec-tion in packing lines; (ii) number of poses, used as a proxy for time efficiency in packing scenarios; (iii) reconstructed surface coverage; and (iv) count of useless poses, namely viewpoints that fail to increase coverage and may tem-porarily degrade reconstruction quality. Fig. 3 summarizes the metrics over five runs per object. We applied the Mann–Whitney U test to compare LR-NBV , NBV , and HEU across all metrics and objects. LR-NBV achieves statistically significant gains ( p< 0.05) in IoU for horizontal box and gripper . For vertical box and 

flange , significant differences ( p< 0.05) appear in at least one bounding-box dimension (length, width, or height), indicating more accurate size estimates in several cases relative to the baselines. In terms of efficiency, LR-NBV 

consistently requires fewer poses ( p< 0.05)—often less than half of NBV —while maintaining comparable reconstruc-tion percentages. This efficiency stems from better priori-tization of informative viewpoints, reducing redundancy. Conversely, NBV exhibits more useless poses , reducing coverage and requiring extra views. 

4.2 Study B: Full Pipeline Evaluation 

In this study we evaluate the end-to-end robotic pack-ing pipeline (Sec. 3) under realistic operating conditions. We compare the two view policy (Sec. 3.1): Exploration XPLR , which at each step selects the cluster with the 

lowest stability score to spread sensing across objects, and Exploitation XPLT , which selects the cluster with the highest stability score to focus on a specific object and trigger an early grasp. The two types of objects used in the experiments are shown in Fig. 5, which are actual production parts used in a packing line. To isolate sensing constraints, we evaluate two effective input resolutions: R60 (60 ×60) and R 30 (30 ×30). Experiments were conducted on an ABB GoFa 12 collab-orative arm with a MaixSense A010 time-of-flight sensor mounted on the end effector (70 ◦ × 60 ◦ FoV, 100 ×100 resolution). Inputs were downsampled to the effective res-olutions R60 and R30 . Grasp generation is performed by 

GraspNet (Fang et al. (2020)) in a depth-only configu-ration, producing 6D grasp hypotheses with associated scores from the point cloud. In each episode, three ob-jects in random poses are provided on a pallet, and the robot transfers them sequentially into a container; a single initial randomized acquisition is adopted. We report: (i) grasp success rate (%), (ii) mean surface reconstruction (% coverage) at grasp time, (iii) failure breakdown by cause, and (iv) makespan to empty the pallet with the required acquisitions to grasp each object. Policy and resolution define a 2 × 2 design (R 60 /R 30 , XPLT/XPLR), evaluated on two object types. For each setting, we perform 16 trials (8 per object), yielding 64 trials and T = 192 grasp attempts, with no re-attempts. The experiment continues until the pallet is cleared. Fig. 3. Acquisition results for four objects: horizontal box (top left), vertical box (bottom left), gripper (top right), and flange (bottom right). For each object: (a) estimated dimensions and IoU; (b) canonical dimensions; (c) surface coverage, number of poses, and useless poses. Image from Preziosa et al. (2025). Table 2. Grasp success             

> Object R60–XPLR R60–XPLT R30–XPLR R30–XPLT Obj A 62.5% 70.8% 54.2% 54.2% Obj B 66.7% 58.3% 83.3% 75.0%

Grasp success We executed T = 192 grasp attempts overall: S = 126 successes (65 .6%) and F = 66 failures (34 .4%). Table 2 reports success rate over 24 attempts for each approach. Reading the table in light of the object properties visible in Fig. 5—Obj A is much larger, whereas Obj B is smaller and includes reflective areas—two trends emerge. First, higher resolution ( R60 ) makes large parts easier to reconstruct and grasp: denser, more coherent geometry stabilizes pose estimation and improves grasp ranking, explaining better success on Obj A. Second, for small, shiny parts, R30 often outperforms R60 : higher resolution captures more false reflections from reflective surfaces, adding spurious points that confuse clustering; the lower resolution acts like mild spatial smoothing, reducing noise and yielding more reliable grasps on Obj B. Table 3. Mean reconstruction at grasp time             

> Object R60–XPLR R60–XPLT R30–XPLR R30–XPLT Obj A 42.55% 56.29% 39.79% 44.36% Obj B 54.77% 59.83% 50.45% 47.32%

Surface reconstruction At each grasp trial, we measured the surface reconstruction at the decision point (i.e., when the object was judged grasp-ready). The means in Ta-ble 3 lie consistently in the 40–60% range across all pol-icy–resolution pairs and both objects. This aligns with our design goal: the pipeline does not seek exhaustive geometry but a partial, grasp-ready model. At the same time it avoids under-reconstructed cases (below 40%) where grasp hypotheses are possible but unstable. 

Grasp failures To interpret the coverage results, failures are classified by cause: i) STAB (stability–readiness fail-ure): we deem an object grasp–ready when one or more grasp hypotheses persist across iterations. We classify a failure as STAB when the object was grasp–ready and the 

Fig. 4. Failure breakdown by object and condition (per-centages over fails) proposed grasp is consistent with the locally reconstructed patch, yet execution fails because unreconstructed regions are essential for grasp success. ii) SPUR : grasps are pro-posed on spurious points caused by sensor noise, often amplified by reflective surfaces; iii) UNSEEN : the object is never sufficiently observed or not segmented. iv) EXT :failures due to external constraints (e.g., motion planning or workspace limitations). Across all conditions we observed F = 66 failures. Per-centages in Fig. 4 are computed within the failures of each condition . Focusing on STAB, it accounts for 33 .3% of all failures (weighted across conditions). By policy, XPLR averages 37 .5% STAB whereas XPLT averages 29 .4%, in-dicating that XPLT reduces false positives by enforcing a stricter, object-specific verification of grasp readiness. Despite this, the stability index under low-resolution re-construction remains effective, as reflected by the overall grasp success. The breakdown indicates that noise from low-cost, low-resolution sensing is a major error source, strongly influenced by reflectivity and ambient light. 

Acquisition curves Fig. 5a and Fig. 5c complement this view by showing the number of observations required per object before grasp. In both figures, the two R30 curves lie above the corresponding R60 curves—consistent with the fact that higher resolution captures more informa-Fig. 5. (a,c) Number of acquisitions required before each grasp for three objects, under different acquisition and resolution modes. The x-axis denotes the grasp index (#1–#3). (b,d) Corresponding experimental setups for Obj A and Obj B. tive points per view and thus needs fewer acquisitions to reach graspability. All curves exhibit a sublinear pro-gression: after grasping Object #1, many earlier views already contributed evidence for the remaining items, so Objects #2–#3 typically require progressively fewer ad-ditional observations. Policy-wise, XPLR tracks a clearer logarithmic pattern (it lifts the least-reconstructed item at each step), while XPLT is closer to linear because it focuses on a single object until grasp and may leave the next one starting from scratch. This explains the flatter decay of the depth curves noted in both figures; notably, with low-resolution sensing, reflective areas can intermittently corrupt reconstruction and trigger partial tear-down, so—even for the smallest object—the overall makespan can remain comparable to the largest one. 5. CONCLUSION This paper shows that low-resolution, low-cost percep-tion is a viable solution for robotic packing. We propose an object-centric pipeline that combines a low-resolution NBV strategy (LR–NBV) with grasp-driven reconstruc-tion and a stability by re-observation criterion. Experi-ments demonstrate that low-resolution sensing can reliably estimate object extents for packing, while the integration of reconstruction and grasp stability enables effective de-cisions on when to grasp without requiring full geometry. Future work will address more challenging scenarios, in-cluding highly reflective objects, by identifying and effi-ciently sensing problematic regions. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors acknowledge Camozzi Research Center for providing robotic equipment, as well as for their support. REFERENCES Alliegro, A., Rudorfer, M., Frattin, F., Leonardis, A., and Tommasi, T. (2022). End-to-end learning to grasp via sampling from object point clouds. IEEE RAL .Arruda, E., Wyatt, J., and Kopicki, M. (2016). Active vision for dexterous grasping of novel objects. In 

IEEE/RSJ IROS .Breyer, M., Ott, L., Siegwart, R., and Chung, J.J. (2022). Closed-loop next-best-view planning for target-driven grasping. In IEEE/RSJ IROS .Ceriani, N.M., Avanzini, G.B., Zanchettin, A.M., Bascetta, L., and Rocco, P. (2013). Optimal placement of spots in distributed proximity sensors for safe human-robot interaction. In IEEE ICRA .Deng, D. (2020). Dbscan clustering algorithm based on density. In Int. Forum Electr. Eng. Autom. 

Fang, H.S., Wang, C., Gou, M., and Lu, C. (2020). Graspnet-1billion: A large-scale benchmark for general object grasping. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) .Gualtieri, M. and Platt, R. (2017). Viewpoint selection for grasp detection. In IEEE/RSJ IROS) .Hong, Y.D., Kim, Y.J., and Lee, K.B. (2020). Smart pack: online autonomous object-packing system using rgb-d sensor data. Sensors .Massios, N.A., Fisher, R.B., et al. (1998). A best next view selection algorithm incorporating a quality criterion. In 

Proc. British Machine Vision Conference .Morrison, D., Corke, P., and Leitner, J. (2019). Multi-view picking: Next-best-view reaching for improved grasping in clutter. In IEEE ICRA .Naazare, M., Rosas, F.G., and Schulz, D. (2022). Online next-best-view planner for 3d-exploration and inspec-tion with a mobile manipulator robot. IEEE RAL .Preziosa, G.F., Castellano, C., Zanchettin, A.M., Faroni, M., and Rocco, P. (2025). Low resolution next best view for robot packing. IFAC-PapersOnLine . 14th IFAC Symposium on Robotics ROBOTICS. Scott, W.R., Roth, G., and Rivest, J.F. (2003). View planning for automated three-dimensional object recon-struction and inspection. ACM Comput. Surv. 

Selin, M., Tiger, M., Duberg, D., Heintz, F., and Jensfelt, P. (2019). Efficient autonomous exploration planning of large-scale 3-d environments. IEEE RAL .Shome, R., Tang, W.N., Song, C., Mitash, C., Kourtev, H., Yu, J., Boularias, A., and Bekris, K.E. (2019). Towards robust product packing with a minimalistic end-effector. In IEEE ICRA .Ten Pas, A., Gualtieri, M., Saenko, K., and Platt, R. (2017). Grasp pose detection in point clouds. The Int. Journal of Robotics Research .Wang, F. and Hauser, K. (2019). Stable bin packing of non-convex 3d objects with a robot manipulator. In 

IEEE ICRA .Wang, F. and Hauser, K. (2021). Dense robotic packing of irregular and novel 3d objects. IEEE Trans. on Robotics .