Title: SLAM in Low-Light Environments: Project Report

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17699v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:38:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# SLAM in Low-Light Environments: Project Report 

# Oleh Basystyi, Anna Stasyshyn, Oleksandr Kosovan, Yaroslav Prytula 

Applied Sciences Faculty, Ukrainian Catholic University Lviv, Ukraine Conducted as part of the certification program “Off-Road Visual Navigation: Development and Evaluation of Systems in Challenging Environments” at the Faculty of Applied Sciences, Ukrainian Catholic University, in collaboration with the UCU UGV Club. 

# Abstract 

Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is one of the fundamental problems in robotics, as it enables autonomous op-erations in real-world scenarios. Under low illumination, re-duced contrast, sensor noise, and motion blur degrade both feature extraction and feature matching, while compensating with LiDAR, depth, or thermal sensors raises cost, power draw, and integration complexity. Existing benchmarks remain dom-inated by well-lit indoor or daylight sequences, leaving open how far SLAM with standard RGB cameras can be pushed in the dark. We benchmark six systems spanning the feature-based, di-rect, filter-based, and learning-based paradigms—ORB-SLAM3, DSO, Kimera-VIO, OpenVINS, DPVO, and DPV-SLAM—on five LaMARia sequences of varying difficulty and illumination, re-porting absolute and relative pose error alongside control-point recall. Kimera-VIO is the only system to track all five sequences to completion, combining the lowest relative pose error with steadily growing absolute error due to the absence of loop clo-sure; DPVO and DPV-SLAM never lose tracking but incur ab-solute errors of roughly 100 m under low light; and the classi-cal monocular pipelines (ORB-SLAM3, DSO) together with the filter-based OpenVINS fail outright or diverge on most of the harder and low-light sequences. The results suggest that RGB-only SLAM maintains stable low-light tracking only when both inertial fusion and global optimization are present. Closing the remaining gap will likely require low-light-specific learned front-ends or a return to complementary sensing. 

# 1 Introduction 

# 1.1 SLAM 

Simultaneous localization and mapping (Thrun et al., 2005) is a method for autonomous navigation of mobile robots, including unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs). It defines a state estimation problem in which the autonomous system must determine its location in the environment while generating a map representa-tion of the environment. Early SLAM applications relied on filtering algorithms, such as the Kalman filter (Smith et al., 1990; Dissanayake et al., 2001), which iteratively updated a joint state vector containing both the landmark poses and the agent’s (camera) aggregated pose. However, as the state vector grows, these methods incur expo-nentially increasing computational costs and accumulate ran-dom walk noise, leading to drift. Consequently, modern implementations have shifted to-wards optimization-based (or keyframe-based) systems (Mur-Artal et al., 2015; Mur-Artal and Tardós, 2017; Campos et al., 2021). These systems separate the SLAM pipeline into two paral-lel threads: localization (the front-end), and mapping (the back-end). 

# 1.2 SLAM in UGV navigation 

To navigate autonomously, a UGV requires continuous aware-ness of its exact position relative to its environment. Even when a mission is initialized with known global coordinates (such as a GPS starting point) and a defined target destination, the robot must reliably determine its current state and location through-out the operation to navigate effectively. This continuous state estimation forms the core operational requirement of SLAM. Beyond localization, the UGV must dynamically interact with its surroundings, introducing the critical need for exploration 1arXiv:2607.17699v1 [cs.RO] 20 Jul 2026 and path planning. While the UGV may have a predeter-mined target, real-world environments are unpredictable and of-ten contain unknown or moving obstacles that block the initial route. To handle this, the map generated by the SLAM pipeline is used by third-party processes, such as path-planning algo-rithms (Hart et al., 1968; LaValle, 1998; Macenski et al., 2020), allowing the system to safely explore, recalculate, and adapt its trajectory on the fly. However, path planning and obstacle avoidance require a gen-erated map. Although sparse maps, which consist of scattered 3D map points, are sufficient for tracking the camera’s pose and localization, they lack the structural detail needed to de-tect physical barriers. Therefore, for a UGV to successfully avoid obstacles and replan paths, the system must generate dense or semi-dense maps. These dense representations provide a com-prehensive representation of the scene’s geometry, supplying the necessary volume and structural context for the UGV to nav-igate safely. 

# 2 Motivation 

The discussion above makes the choice of SLAM as a core tech-nology well-motivated. However, it also reveals a critical gap: the environments where UGVs are most needed are precisely those where standard visual SLAM is least reliable. Industry and dual-use applications routinely demand 24-hour autonomy. Emergency response robots must function in power-outage conditions. Agricultural robots operate at dawn and dusk. Search-and-rescue systems are deployed in collapsed or smoke-filled structures where artificial lighting is absent or in-consistent. In all of these scenarios, the dense and semi-dense maps on which UGV path planning depends must be built from a severely degraded visual signal. Despite this practical urgency, most SLAM benchmarks and system evaluations are conducted under well-lit indoor or daylight conditions. The gap between the environments in which SLAM is typically evaluated and those in which it must actually operate motivates this work. Prior benchmarks evaluate SLAM predominantly on well-lit indoor datasets such as TUM RGB-D (Sturm et al., 2012) and EuRoC MAV (Burri et al., 2016), or outdoor daylight driving se-quences such as KITTI (Geiger et al., 2012); none systematically study the combined degradation of ultra-low illumination, dust haze, and motion blur encountered in operational conditions. Furthermore, adding specialized sensors, such as LiDAR, depth cameras, or thermal imagers, to close this gap increases system cost, power consumption, and integration complexity, which can be prohibitive for lightweight UGV platforms. This motivates the following research questions, which struc-ture the remainder of the report: • RQ1 : Can modern visual SLAM systems using only stan-dard RGB cameras achieve stable and sufficiently accurate localization and mapping under low-light conditions? • RQ2 : How does performance degrade across SLAM paradigms — feature-based, direct, filter-based, and learning-based — as sequence difficulty and illumination worsen? • RQ3 : How much of the low-light gap can be closed through algorithmic choices alone, without the addition of special-ized sensors? We address RQ1 and RQ2 empirically, by benchmarking six representative systems on five LaMARia sequences of varying difficulty and illumination (Section 5.5), and RQ3 by relating the observed failure modes to the algorithmic mitigations surveyed in Section 4 (Section 6). 

# 3 Background 

The SLAM problem can be formalized mathematically. Given a sequence of controls 𝑢 1∶𝑡 and observations 𝑧 1∶𝑡 , the goal is to estimate the robot trajectory 𝑥 1∶𝑡 and the map 𝑚 . Formally, the problem is to compute the posterior (Thrun et al., 2005): 

𝑃(𝑥 1∶𝑡 , 𝑚 ∣ 𝑧 1∶𝑡 , 𝑢 1∶𝑡 ). 

Using Bayes’ rule, the posterior can be written as: 

𝑃(𝑥 1∶𝑡 , 𝑚 ∣ 𝑧 1∶𝑡 , 𝑢 1∶𝑡 ) = 𝜂𝑃(𝑥 0)

> 𝑡

∏

> 𝑘=1

𝑃(𝑥 𝑘 ∣ 𝑥 𝑘−1 , 𝑢 𝑘 )𝑃(𝑧 𝑘 ∣ 𝑥 𝑘 , 𝑚) ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟ 

> Motion & Observation Models

,

where 𝜂 is a normalization constant. This formulation shows that SLAM factorizes into motion constraints between consec-utive poses and observation constraints linking poses with the map. The objective is to find the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate: 

(𝑥 ∗1∶𝑡 , 𝑚 ∗) = arg max   

> 𝑥 1∶𝑡 ,𝑚

𝑃(𝑥 1∶𝑡 , 𝑚 ∣ 𝑧 1∶𝑡 , 𝑢 1∶𝑡 ). 

Modern SLAM pipelines implement this estimation using two primary abstraction layers: localization (the front-end) and map-ping (the back-end). 

# 3.1 Localization 

Localization, or the front-end, comprises the lower abstraction layer where raw sensor inputs are abstracted into a model used for tracking and incremental localization. While the ultimate goal is global consistency, the tracking thread focuses on com-puting a local trajectory by determining the set of relative rigid-body transformations 𝐓 𝑘−1,𝑘 ∈ 𝑆𝐸(3) between subsequent frames (we denote elements of 𝑆𝐸(3) in bold throughout, with subscripts for time/frame index, superscripts for reference frame). Visual localization methods are broadly classified based on their optimization constraints: indirect (feature-based) meth-ods (Mur-Artal et al., 2015; Mur-Artal and Tardós, 2017), and di-rect (appearance-based) methods (Engel et al., 2018). The former recovers motion ( 𝐓 𝑘−1,𝑘 ) by minimizing the reprojection error over geometric constraints between matched features, while the latter estimates motion directly from pixel-intensity information by minimizing photometric error. Additionally, the front-end incorporates loop closure detec-tion and relocalization modules (Cadena et al., 2016). Loop de-tection is critical for identifying revisited areas to correct ac-cumulated drift, typically involving image representation (e.g., Bag-of-Words) (Mur-Artal et al., 2015), candidate selection, and geometric verification. 23.2 Mapping 

The back-end is responsible for inferring from the front-end data to generate a consistent map and optimize the overall trajec-tory. The structure and processing of the map generally follow one of two paradigms, which are filter-based approaches and optimization-based approaches. The filter-based approaches (Thrun et al., 2005; Kalman, 1960) are formulated with variants of the Bayes filter. These methods marginalize past measurements to maintain a compact joint state vector of landmarks and the current camera pose. However, they suffer from exponential computational growth and noise accu-mulation over time. The optimization-based methods (Strasdat et al., 2012) are considered the current de facto standard; these systems solve the "complete graph" of constraints over a subset of frames known as keyframes (Mur-Artal et al., 2015; Mur-Artal and Tardós, 2017; Campos et al., 2021). Keyframes are selected based on criteria such as distance, parallax, or covisibility. Optimization is typically implemented via factor graphs, uti-lizing algorithms like Bundle Adjustment (BA) (Triggs et al., 2000), which optimizes both camera poses and 3D map points, or Pose Graph Optimization (PGO), which focuses on rigid-body transformations. The resulting map can vary in density, ranging from sparse maps consisting of 3D map points to dense maps used for full scene representation. Recent advancements are driving a shift toward learning-based pipelines, aiming for end-to-end differentiability in both localization and mapping mod-ules. To fully understand the landscape of 3D mapping, we survey the variety of scene representations (Deng et al., 2026) in use today, ranging from classic geometric forms to modern neural approaches. The fundamental classic representation is the point cloud, which is an unordered sparse set of 3D points that is usually derived directly from depth sensors or SLAM tracking. While point clouds are highly efficient for simple localization, their dis-crete nature makes them highly prone to occlusion and a lack of structural volume. To address the limitations of point clouds’ lack of structure, systems often use voxel grids (Hornung et al., 2013), which di-vide 3D space into discrete volumetric cells that can store density or occupancy. Though highly structured, they entail a computa-tional trade-off between memory consumption and map resolu-tion. To achieve continuous geometric boundaries without the heavy memory footprint of high-resolution voxels, mapping pipelines frequently convert these discrete representations into meshes. Meshes construct continuous surfaces from discrete points, making them suitable for collision checking and physics simulation, though they lack view-dependent appearance data. Scene graphs (Rosinol et al., 2020b) structure the mapped en-vironment as a hierarchical multigraph, fusing raw geometry with high-level semantic and spatial relationships between ob-jects. This makes them suitable for complex task planning and human-robot interaction. Recently, the mapping paradigm has shifted toward neu-ral representations, starting with Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021). NeRF implicitly encodes 3D scenes into the weights of multi-layer perceptrons, mapping continuous spatial coordinates to color and volume density to provide incredible photorealism. However, NeRFs require significant computational time to train and render, making real-time robotic deployment difficult. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al., 2023) has emerged as a powerful alternative. 3DGS explicitly models a scene using millions of learnable 3D anisotropic ellipsoids, achieving high-quality photorealism while enabling extremely fast, real-time rasterization (Matsuki et al., 2024) and map editability. Latest advancements move beyond explicit geometry and ra-diance fields by utilizing tokenizer representations or foundation models. These models encode complex visual, semantic, and ge-ometric scene elements into a sequence of discrete tokens pro-cessed by transformer networks (Wang et al., 2024, 2025; Siméoni et al., 2025). 

# 4 Methods overview 

# 4.1 Keypoint based SLAM 

The reliability of any visual SLAM system depends on its ability to identify and describe features , a term often used interchange-ably with key points. Features are distinctive parts of an image, such as corners, edges, or textures. This process is divided into two distinct steps: detection and description. A detector identi-fies interest points (i.e., keypoints), which are preferably robust to rotation, scale, and the effects of illumination on their color appearance and sharpness. Once a point is identified, a descrip-tor converts the local neighborhood of that feature into a nu-meric vector, which must be invariant to environmental shifts to allow for consistent recognition across multiple views. Once features are successfully described, the system must establish correspondences between frames, which is the process known as data association. 

## 4.1.1 Feature extractors and descriptors 

Feature extraction serves as the critical bridge between raw sensory input and geometric motion estimation by identifying points of interest that are consistent across varying perspec-tives. Traditional approaches to this problem, such as FAST (Ros-ten and Drummond, 2006) (Features from Accelerated Segment Test) and ORB (Rublee et al., 2011) (Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF (Calonder et al., 2010)), rely on high-speed heuristic tests of local pixel intensities. FAST identifies corners by evaluating a circle of sixteen pixels around a candidate point, designating it a feature only if a contiguous arc of pixels is significantly brighter or darker than the center. While computationally efficient, FAST is not by itself rotation invariant. ORB addresses this limitation by calculating the intensity centroid of the identified patch to assign a principal orientation, subsequently using BRIEF to gen-erate binary descriptors that remain robust during camera rota-tion. Other classical algorithms, such as SIFT (Lowe, 2004) (Scale In-variant Feature Transform) and SURF (Bay et al., 2006) (Speeded Up Robust Features), offer better reliability due to scale and lumi-nance invariance. SIFT achieves this by detecting features across 3a continuous scale space and assigning orientations based on lo-cal image gradients. However, the high-dimensional floating-point descriptors and multiple processing stages required by SIFT and SURF result in significant computational overhead. This makes them generally unsuitable for real-time robotic tasks, such as UGV navigation. While they produce higher-quality matches than ORB in some scenarios, the trade-off in execution speed remains a bottleneck for practical SLAM implementations. The current state of the art has shifted toward deep learning-based extractors, most notably SuperPoint (DeTone et al., 2018), to overcome the specific failures of geometry-based methods in more complex or ambiguous scenarios. SuperPoint utilizes a self-supervised interest point detector and descriptor network trained to recognize the same landmarks under extreme shifts in perspective, illumination, and color appearance. 

## 4.1.2 Feature matchers 

Once features are extracted, the SLAM front-end must estab-lish accurate correspondences between descriptors in successive frames to estimate the relative rigid body transformation. Tradi-tional approaches typically rely on brute-force matching, which searches for the best match by comparing a feature in the first image against all features in the second based on distance met-rics. It calculates Hamming distance for binary descriptors like ORB, and the L2 distance for floating-point descriptors like SIFT. To maintain real-time performance as the number of land-marks increases, the SLAM pipeline often employs Approxi-mate Nearest Neighbor (Arya et al., 1998) (ANN) algorithms. These methods trade a negligible amount of precision for a sig-nificant increase in search speed by utilizing spatial indexing structures, most notably KD-trees. A KD-tree partitions the high-dimensional descriptor space into a hierarchical tree, al-lowing the matcher to quickly prune large portions of the search space that cannot contain a close match. While ANN meth-ods are highly efficient, especially with accelerated implemen-tations like FANN (Muja and Lowe, 2009), they remain prone to errors caused by "lookalikes", which occur when distinct phys-ical points have nearly identical descriptors, leading to outliers that must be filtered through subsequent geometric verification steps, such as RANSAC. To move beyond the limitations of isolated descriptor com-parisons, modern pipelines are increasingly incorporating deep learning matchers. Unlike classical algorithms that treat each keypoint as an independent entity, DL approaches like Light-Glue (Sarlin et al., 2023) utilize graph neural networks and self-attention mechanisms to learn the spatial and geometric rela-tionships between points. By analyzing the global layout of the scene, these matchers can distinguish between visually similar points based on their relative positions, significantly reducing the mismatch rate in repetitive or complex environments. The combination of deep learning feature extractors and matchers is present in a large portion of the currently used ap-proaches, namely the SuperPoint and LightGlue combination. However, these approaches raise the problem of computational overhead and increased hardware requirements. 

# 4.2 Low-light localization and mapping 

As discussed above, low-light environments present a challeng-ing task for modern SLAM systems because they heavily rely on visual sensors. Several categories of mitigation have been proposed. One of the naive approaches involves image prepro-cessing with CLAHE (Pizer et al., 1990), which enhances local contrast. However, performance degrades in moderately low-light conditions. Newer approaches focus on deep learning pre-processing (Liu et al., 2026; Lu et al., 2025) to get a more robust, brightened image. Another deep learning paradigm considers the usage of feature extractors tailored for low-light environ-ments (Pautrat et al., 2023). 

## 4.2.1 Effects of low-light 

In visual SLAM and autonomous navigation, the transition from standard indoor lighting (300–500 lux) to low-light environ-ments (10–50 lux) or extreme darkness (below 1 lux) introduces several degradations that fundamentally break the many as-sumptions about the environment that traditional algorithms rely on. Reduced illumination has distinct and measurable ef-fects on the image quality. As illumination drops, the sensor’s electronic noise becomes more prominent relative to the captured light, resulting in "grainy" images that obscure fine geometric details. This effect is measured by the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), defined as the ratio of signal power to noise power. Reduced contrast leads to the disappearance of sharp edges and corners, which are the primary "landmarks" used by classical feature extractors like ORB or FAST. To compensate for low light, cameras often increase expo-sure times; for a moving agent, this results in significant blur-ring that smears features across multiple pixels. In extreme low light (below 1 lux), digital sensors struggle to perceive color ac-curately, leading to shifted or desaturated palettes that fail color-consistency checks. For visual SLAM systems, these degradations lead to a high mismatch rate, where the system either fails to extract enough points or incorrectly pairs noisy pixels in consecutive frames, ultimately resulting in localization drift or total tracking failure. 

## 4.2.2 Preprocessing and image enhancement 

The natural idea to tackle the problem of insufficient illumina-tion is image preprocessing. Several methods are used to fix under-exposure. One such approach is EnlightenGAN (Jiang et al., 2019), which is trained with unpaired supervision. This allows the model to learn how to brighten and denoise images without requiring a dataset of perfectly aligned dark and bright training pairs, which are often difficult to capture in real-world scenarios. The Bread (Guo and Hu, 2022) architecture is designed to han-dle more severe degradations by decomposing the enhancement process into three distinct sub-tasks: noise suppression, illumi-nation adjustment, and color restoration. It operates by convert-ing the input into a luminance-chrominance space, allowing the system to suppress noise in the brightened luminance channel independently. 4Zero-DCE (Guo et al., 2020) formulates image enhancement as the estimation of pixel-wise, high-order nonlinear curves. Unlike many other deep learning approaches, it trains entirely without reference images—either paired or unpaired—by relying on a set of non-reference loss functions. Dual Illumination Estimation (Zhang et al., 2019) addresses ro-bust exposure correction by simultaneously tackling under- and over-exposure. It predicts a forward illumination map for the original image to correct dark regions and a reverse illumination map for an inverted version of the input to handle over-exposed areas. 

## 4.2.3 Robust matchers and extractors 

While image enhancement modules can recover lost illumina-tion, the preprocessed images often retain artifacts such as syn-thetic noise, color distortion, or smoothed textures. These resid-ual degradations cause classical geometric extractors like ORB to produce clustered, unreliable detections, or fail entirely. Con-sequently, a robust low-light SLAM pipeline must integrate per-ception components that can resist these artifacts. To address this, the combination of deep-learned key-points and graph-based matching, most notably the Super-Point (DeTone et al., 2018) and SuperGlue (Sarlin et al., 2020) (or its more efficient successor, LightGlue (Sarlin et al., 2023)) ar-chitecture, is widely adopted. In low-light scenarios, local pixel gradients are often too weak or noisy to define a distinct corner. SuperPoint overcomes this with learned, higher-level structural context. Rather than relying on rigid heuristic tests, it is trained with homographic adaptation to recognize the underlying ge-ometry of a scene, allowing it to reliably detect repeatable land-marks even in visually ambiguous or under-exposed regions. Once these features are extracted, establishing accurate cor-respondences in the dark becomes the next challenge. In low-light environments, distinct physical points frequently produce nearly identical, low-contrast local patches. Traditional nearest-neighbor matchers fail because they evaluate these descriptors in isolation. The SuperGlue and LightGlue architectures solve this by utilizing self- and cross-attention mechanisms to evalu-ate the global geometric layout of the scene. By contextualizing a keypoint within the broader structure of the image, these match-ers can accurately resolve ambiguities and reject the "lookalike" outliers that typically dominate dark scenes. Beyond the SuperPoint and LightGlue paradigm, several al-ternatives have been explored specifically for light-denied en-vironments. Dense matchers, such as LoFTR (Sun et al., 2021) (Local Feature Matching with Transformers), bypass the key-point detection phase entirely. Instead of extracting discrete features, LoFTR establishes coarse pixel-wise matches at a lower resolution and refines them at a higher resolution. This correlation-based approach is exceptionally effective in low-light and texture-less environments where distinct keypoints simply cannot be found. However, dense matchers introduce significant computational overhead (which is a more significant problem considering the use of previous stages of battling low-light), making them challenging to deploy for real-time UGV navigation compared to the adaptive, early-exit architecture of LightGlue. Other learned extractors like D2-Net (Dusmanu et al., 2019), which tightly couples feature detection and description, or ALIKE (Zhao et al., 2022) and ALIKED (Zhao et al., 2023), of-fer varying trade-offs between feature density and localization accuracy. Nonetheless, for systems requiring a balance between robustness against illumination changes and real-time inference speeds, the SuperPoint and LightGlue pairing currently serves as the optimal baseline for low-light visual SLAM. 

## 4.2.4 Low-light in other 3D tasks 

One of the latest trends in SLAM is the usage of alternative scene representations during the mapping phase. Some of these ap-proaches may help with the low-light task. Specifically, 3DGS, NeRFs, and foundation model approaches have shown signifi-cantly better performance for this task. Sun et al. (2025) consider the novel-view synthesis problem for low-light scenes. As in SLAM, these algorithms fail in low-light conditions because they assume high-quality, well-exposed inputs. Instead of relying on SfM, the algorithm uses dense priors from a learning-based Multi-View Stereo approach to gener-ate initial point clouds. It then applies stochastic pruning and depth-guided refinement to remove artifacts. The authors also reformulate the splatting optimization problem. They introduce Dual-branch Gaussian Decomposition. The scene is disentan-gled into two sets of Gaussians – intrinsic Gaussians, which cap-ture static reflectance and illumination, and transient Gaussians, which specifically model unstable content like sensor noise and illumination artifacts. LL-Gaussian significantly outperforms SoTA methods in low-light sRGB reconstruction. It achieves up to 2,000x faster infer-ence and reduces training time to just 2% compared to NeRF-based methods. It maintains fine details and accurate colors even in moonlit environments (0.1 lux) where other methods produce blurry textures or fail to converge. Also, the LLGIM ini-tialization achieves accuracy comparable to using ground-truth normal-light data. Even though this paper does not address SLAM directly, it shows that learning-based MVS can replace traditional feature matching in the dark. In addition, the dual-branch decomposi-tion technique may be applicable to GS-based SLAM approaches, potentially improving mapping in the dark while also partially addressing dynamic environments. 

## 4.2.5 Sensor fusion for light-denied environments 

While deep learning-based image enhancement and robust fea-ture matching significantly extend the operational envelope of visual SLAM, absolute light deprivation or sudden, drastic illu-mination shifts can still cause catastrophic tracking failures. In environments where the visual signal is close to non-existent, algorithmic mitigation alone is insufficient. To ensure contin-uous and safe autonomous UGV operation, the SLAM pipeline must transition from a purely visual approach to a multi-modal sensor fusion architecture, integrating sensors that possess com-plementary failure domains. The most fundamental integration is Visual-Inertial SLAM (VI-SLAM), which tightly couples camera data with an Iner-tial Measurement Unit (IMU). The IMU provides high-frequency 5kinematic measurements—specifically linear acceleration and angular velocity—that are entirely independent of ambient light-ing. In a tightly-coupled optimization framework, the IMU main-tains the short-term ego-motion estimation during transient pe-riods of severe motion blur, sudden glare, or complete darkness. While IMU measurements inherently accumulate drift over time through double integration, they successfully bridge the tempo-ral gaps in visual tracking until the camera recovers enough re-liable features to correct the accumulated positional error. For sustained operation in light-denied settings, passive visual sensors are frequently fused with active ranging devices such as LiDAR. Because LiDAR emits its own infrared laser pulses to measure distance, it is completely invariant to external illumi-nation, providing highly accurate 3D geometry in pitch-black conditions. Fusing these modalities creates a robust mutual-compensation mechanism. When visual tracking fails due to darkness, the system seamlessly falls back on LiDAR geometry; conversely, when the UGV navigates geometrically degenerate environments, such as long, featureless tunnels where LiDAR struggles to estimate forward motion, enhanced visual features provide the necessary longitudinal constraints. Furthermore, emerging sensor technologies like event cam-eras and thermal imaging are becoming highly relevant for nighttime SLAM. Event cameras are asynchronous neuromor-phic sensors that record pixel-level brightness changes rather than absolute intensity frames. They possess an exceptionally high dynamic range and microsecond latency, rendering them virtually immune to motion blur and highly effective in both extreme darkness and high-dynamic-range scenes. Similarly, Long-Wave Infrared (LWIR) or thermal cameras capture heat signatures independent of visible light. Incorporating thermal data into the SLAM pipeline not only provides a reliable track-ing signal in the dark but also natively assists in identifying and filtering dynamic objects, such as pedestrians or running vehi-cles, further supporting the static-scene assumptions required for stable mapping. 

# 4.3 Handling of non-static environments 

As discussed above, the SLAM pipeline works by tracking the same features between consecutive keyframes (for example, pix-els corresponding to the same points in 3D space). Given such correspondences, it is straightforward to estimate the relative motion 𝐓 𝑖,𝑖+1 . However, if the scene is non-static (e.g. other mov-ing vehicles, or intense branch wiggling), this estimate may be highly inaccurate. This motivates a mechanism to detect and re-ject invalid correspondences, or to minimize the effect of minor violations during optimization. Soares et al. (2025) propose a visual SLAM framework that improves robustness in dynamic scenes by combining seman-tic correspondence filtering with adaptive robust optimization. The method extends the ORB-SLAM3 pipeline. To address known dynamic objects, the system employs a lightweight deep-learning object detector (YOLOv4). The detector identifies bounding boxes corresponding to dynamic classes (e.g., people), and correspondences within these regions are filtered. Depth consistency is additionally used to distinguish between fore-ground object points and background features, allowing the re-moval of correspondences associated with moving objects while preserving useful background structure. The remaining (possibly non-static) observations are opti-mized using a robust bundle adjustment formulation. Let 𝜃 de-note the set of camera poses and 3D map points, and let 𝑒 𝑖 (𝜃) 

represent the magnitude of the reprojection residual. The SLAM estimation problem is formulated as 

𝜃 ∗ = arg min  

> 𝜃

∑

> 𝑖

𝜌(𝑒 𝑖 (𝜃)). 

Instead of using a fixed robust kernel such as the Huber loss, the method employs Barron’s generalized robust loss, defined as 

𝜌(𝑒; 𝛼, 𝑐) = |𝛼 − 2| 𝛼 [( 𝑒 2

|𝛼 − 2|𝑐 2 + 1 )

> 𝛼/2

− 1 ] ,

where 𝛼 controls the shape of the loss function and 𝑐 is a scale parameter. Different values of 𝛼 correspond to different classi-cal estimators (e.g., 𝛼 = 2 recovers 𝐿 2, 𝛼 = 1 recovers smooth 

𝐿 1), enabling the optimizer to adapt its robustness to the residual distribution, which in turn means that it can cope with different degrees of non-static assumption violation. The parameter 𝛼 is estimated online by minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the residuals: 

𝛼 ∗ = arg min  

> 𝛼

∑

> 𝑖

[log̃ 𝑍(𝛼) + 𝜌(𝑒 𝑖 ; 𝛼, 𝑐)] , 

where ̃ 𝑍(𝛼) is a function ensuring normalization of output values. The optimization alternates between updating 𝛼 and solving for the SLAM variables using iteratively reweighted least squares. Let 𝐾 denote the set of keyframes in the local window, 

𝑃 𝑗 the set of map points observed in keyframe 𝑗 , 𝑢 𝑖𝑗 the observed pixel location of point 𝑖 in keyframe 𝑗 , 𝜋(⋅) the camera projection function, 𝑋 𝑖 the 3D position of map point 𝑖 , and 𝐓 𝑐𝑤 𝑗 the camera-to-world pose of keyframe 𝑗 . The adaptive loss is then applied as: 

{𝐓 𝑐𝑤 𝑗 , 𝑋 𝑖 , 𝛼} ∗ = arg min   

> {𝐓 𝑐𝑤 𝑗 },{𝑋 𝑖 },𝛼

∑

> 𝑗∈𝐾

∑

> 𝑖∈𝑃 𝑗

𝜌(‖𝑢 𝑖𝑗 − 𝜋(𝐓 𝑐𝑤 𝑗 𝑋 𝑖 )‖ 2; 𝛼, 𝑐) . 

By combining deep-learning-based dynamic object detection with adaptive robust optimization, the proposed approach could minimize the effect of dynamic features, allowing the SLAM sys-tem to maintain accurate localization and mapping in dynamic environments while preserving real-time performance. 

# 5 Experiments 

# 5.1 Datasets 

Among visual-inertial SLAM datasets, EuRoC (Burri et al., 2016) is the classic benchmark. Besides IMU and stereo data, it also provides accurate ground truth. However, there are reasons why it is not a suitable dataset choice for our context. Firstly, it consists of indoor sequences. This does not reflect our target scenario, which mostly includes military applications. Secondly, the problem of low-light is not captured in the official dataset. Some open-source contributions extend the sequences with variants that artificially introduce varying levels of visual 6degradation. Having the same high-quality ground truth for each sequence variant makes it possible to isolate the effects of illumination. However, these synthetic degradations are often not physically realistic, and the footage does not account for the camera’s exposure adaptation. Other options include the TUM VI benchmark (Schubert et al., 2018), which includes indoor and outdoor sequences but focuses mainly on challenging VIO with high-FOV cameras, and the KITTI benchmark (Geiger et al., 2012), which specializes in driv-ing and provides LiDAR and GPS but whose setting differs sub-stantially from the operational environments considered in this work. The dataset we have chosen for our experiments is the LaMARia (Krishnan et al., 2025). It was specifically designed to benchmark visual-inertial SLAM under realistic egocentric op-erating conditions and includes a wider range of environmental and illumination variations that better reflect our target deploy-ment scenario. 

# 5.2 Evaluation metrics 

Performance is evaluated using standard visual-inertial SLAM metrics. We report the absolute trajectory error (ATE) and rela-tive pose error (RPE). The absolute trajectory error measures the global consistency of the estimated trajectory. Let 𝐓 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝐸(3) denote the ground-truth pose at time 𝑖 and ̂ 𝐓 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝐸(3) the corresponding estimated pose after trajectory alignment. Then, the translational ATE is defined as: 

√1𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑

> 𝑖=1

|||trans (𝐓 −1 𝑖 ̂ 𝐓 𝑖 )|||

> 2

,

where trans(⋅) extracts the translational component of a rigid-body transformation and 𝑁 is the number of evaluated poses. A lower ATE indicates better global localization accuracy and reduced drift accumulation. To evaluate local motion estimation accuracy, we report the relative pose error. For a fixed time interval Δ, the relative pose error 𝐸 at time 𝑖 is given by 

𝐄 𝑖 = (𝐓 −1 𝑖 𝐓 𝑖+Δ )−1 

(̂𝐓 −1 𝑖 ̂ 𝐓 𝑖+Δ )

The translational RPE is then computed from 𝐄 𝑖 as: 

√1𝑀 

> 𝑀

∑

> 𝑖=1

|trans(𝐄 𝑖 )| 2,

where 𝑀 denotes the number of valid pose pairs separated by Δ. Unlike ATE, which measures accumulated drift over the entire trajectory, RPE focuses on short-term motion estimation accuracy and is therefore less sensitive to global alignment er-rors. In order to assess both local and global accuracy of the esti-mated trajectory, we use two complementary metrics introduced in (Krishnan et al., 2025). We discuss and report them in the ap-pendix. 

# 5.3 Methods evaluated 

The experimental evaluation includes the following representa-tive visual(-inertial) SLAM and odometry systems that collec-tively cover feature-based, direct, and optimization-based ap-proaches. ORB-SLAM3 (Campos et al., 2021) is a feature-based visual-inertial SLAM system that extends previous ORB-SLAM ver-sions (Mur-Artal et al., 2015; Mur-Artal and Tardós, 2017) with tightly coupled inertial integration. It supports monocular, stereo, and RGB-D configurations and incorporates loop closure and map reuse. Due to its strong performance across a wide range of benchmarks, ORB-SLAM3 serves as a widely adopted baseline for visual-inertial SLAM. Kimera-VIO (Rosinol et al., 2020a) is the visual-inertial odome-try front-end of the modular Kimera framework, which in its full configuration also supports loop closure and metric-semantic mapping. We evaluate the VIO-only configuration; its tightly coupled optimization-based backend makes it representative of modern graph-based visual-inertial odometry systems. Direct Sparse Odometry (Engel et al., 2018) is a direct visual odometry method that estimates camera motion by minimizing photometric error over selected image pixels rather than rely-ing on feature correspondences. As direct methods utilize image intensity information directly, they provide an interesting com-parison under challenging illumination conditions. OpenVINS (Geneva et al., 2020) is a visual-inertial state esti-mation framework based on the Multi-State Constraint Kalman Filter (MSCKF). Unlike optimization-based approaches, Open-VINS employs a filtering-based architecture, making it compu-tationally efficient while providing competitive visual-inertial odometry performance. DPVO (Teed et al., 2023) (Deep Patch Visual Odometry) is a learning-based monocular visual odometry system that repre-sents the scene through a sparse set of image patches rather than individual keypoints or dense photometric residuals. It tracks these patches across frames using a recurrent network that it-eratively predicts patch correspondences and feeds them into a differentiable bundle adjustment layer, jointly refining camera poses and patch depths. Because the patch representation and the learned update operator are trained end-to-end, DPVO does not rely on hand-crafted feature detectors, brightness-constancy assumptions, or inertial priors, which makes it an interesting candidate for degraded-illumination sequences where classical front-ends break down. However, as a pure odometry method it maintains only a local optimization window and therefore accu-mulates drift without any global correction. DPV-SLAM (Lipson et al., 2024) extends DPVO into a full SLAM system by adding a backend that performs loop closure and global optimization on top of the DPVO frontend. It cou-ples a proximity-based loop-closure mechanism with a classical pose-graph loop closure, allowing accumulated drift to be cor-rected when previously visited regions are revisited, while re-taining the real-time patch-based tracking of DPVO. This makes DPV-SLAM directly comparable to DPVO as an ablation that iso-lates the contribution of the global backend, while both remain monocular and inertial-free. 75.4 Experiment setup 

Experiments were conducted on a subset of the LaMARia (Kr-ishnan et al., 2025) dataset consisting of the sequences 

sequence_4_10 , sequence_4_11 , R_03_easy ,

R_06_medium , and R_09_hard . The selection of a subset of the captures was necessary as evaluating all sequences in the benchmark would be computationally expensive. The selected sequences include both relatively straightfor-ward and challenging trajectories. This allows the evaluation to capture method behavior across various conditions, ranging from scenarios with stable tracking and favorable visual obser-vations to sequences containing more challenging motion pat-terns, environmental complexity, and visual degradation. The sequences R_03_easy , R_06_medium , and 

R_09_hard were selected to capture the varying difficulty levels represented in the dataset. This allows us to evaluate whether the performance of the considered methods degrades with track complexity and tracking difficulty. The additional sequences were selected because they exhibit substantial illumi-nation variation, which is particularly relevant to the objectives of this work. Together, this produces a balanced benchmark without the expense of evaluating all of the scenes. 

# 5.5 Results 

We report ATE RMSE (m) on the specified sequences. A dag-ger ( †) marks a partial-coverage track ( < 50% of GT poses). The system lost tracking and the ATE is over the short tracked span only, so it is not comparable to a full-coverage ATE. The only sequence fully covered by all approaches is R_03_easy .Table 2 reports the corresponding RPE RMSE for each method and sequence. As the strongest contestant, Kimera-VIO provides full cover-age on all five tracks with competitive ATE. Notably, ATE grows significantly with trajectory length while RPE remains low, a di-rect consequence of the lack of loop closure to cancel accumu-lated error. As a VIO rather than a full SLAM pipeline, Kimera-VIO is nonetheless a strong choice for this task. The largest failure case is OpenVINS on sequence_4_10 

and R_09_hard . While some approaches lost tracking over time, and still had a well-tracked prefix (an interval from the start of the sequence up to the point of significant failure), OpenVINS did not produce such an initial interval at all. Before the failure, the ATE already exceeded the values demonstrated by other ap-proaches significantly. This is consistent with filter divergence, which in this dataset can be triggered by handheld motion to-gether with feature loss and outliers arising from occlusions and complex, moving platforms. The DPVO and DPV-SLAM offer great robustness, with no tracking failure despite not relying on inertial priors. However, this comes at a tradeoff of reduced accuracy compared to the successful VIO counterpart, Kimera-VIO. DSO struggles with the task because direct methods assume brightness constancy, while the dataset includes handheld mo-tion blur, illumination change, and low texture. ORB-SLAM3 does not perform well either, since its feature-based front-end fails under low texture, blur, or pure rotation, where sufficient parallax is required. After losing tracking, a new map is initialized at a fresh, arbitrary scale, making recovery of the trajectory fragments unstable. 

# 6 Limitations 

The evaluated systems span feature-based, direct, filter-based, and learning-based paradigms, and each carries limitations that are rooted in its core assumptions. These limitations are not in-cidental to our benchmark; they surface directly in the reported ATE and RPE (Tables 1 and 2) and control-point recall (Table 3), and they shape how each method could be adapted to the low-light UGV domain. ORB-SLAM3 inherits the fundamental limitation of indirect front-ends: it requires a sufficient number of repeatable, well-localized keypoints and adequate parallax between views. Under low illumination, motion blur, low texture, and near-pure rota-tion, the ORB detector produces too few stable corners, tracking is lost, and a new map is initialized in a fresh arbitrary scale. This is visible in our results as the near-total failure of the monocu-lar configuration on all but the easy sequence, and as the “fail” entries in the control-point evaluation, where fewer than three control points could be triangulated. For the target domain, this method can be adapted by replacing the geometric front-end with learned detectors and matchers (e.g. SuperPoint and LightGlue), by adding CLAHE or deep-learning-based illumina-tion enhancement upstream, and by tightly coupling an IMU so that the multi-map system can bridge the tracking gaps that cur-rently fragment the trajectory. DSO is limited by the brightness-constancy assumption at the heart of direct photometric alignment: it assumes that the inten-sity of a scene point is stable across consecutive frames. Low-light auto-exposure changes, sensor noise, and motion blur all violate this assumption, so the photometric residual no longer corresponds to true geometric misalignment. In our benchmark this manifests as large ATE on all but the easy sequence and out-right failure on the hardest and one low-light sequence for RPE. The method could be partially adapted through a photometric calibration and online exposure compensation, and through ro-bust or noise-aware photometric losses, but the underlying re-liance on stable pixel intensities makes it fundamentally fragile in the operational conditions we target. OpenVINS, as an MSCKF filter, is limited by linearization and the difficulty of maintaining a consistent covariance under strong non-linearities. When feature tracks are short-lived and outlier-ridden, as they are under handheld motion, occlusions, and moving platforms in the dataset, the filter diverges rather than merely drifting. This is the most severe behavior we ob-serve: on the hard and one low-light sequence OpenVINS pro-duces no usable initial interval at all, and its ATE exceeds that of the other methods well before the failure point. Adapting a filter-ing approach to this domain would require more robust outlier rejection, tighter feature-track quality gating, and illumination-robust features feeding the update step, though the filter’s sen-sitivity to early estimation errors remains a structural weakness relative to optimization-based backends. Kimera-VIO is our strongest contestant, but it is a visual-inertial odometry system without loop closure in the configura-tion evaluated. Its limitation is therefore unbounded global drift: 8Method easy medium hard low-light 1 low-light 2 

(R_03_easy ) (R_06_medium ) (R_09_hard ) (sequence_4_10 ) (sequence_4_11 )DSO 0.400 11.310 17.478 † 15.473 † 7.147 †

ORB-SLAM3 (mono) 2.768 22.809 † 5.099 † 2.185 † 8.378 †

Kimera-VIO 0.410 2.795 6.055 44.962 43.042 OpenVINS 0.259 18.997 fail fail 11.163 DPVO 0.378 2.123 26.267 104.874 99.453 DPV-SLAM 0.483 3.637 18.460 101.665 97.482 Table 1: Comparison of different VIO/SLAM methods across various sequences. Metric evaluated is RMSE ATE ↓ (m). 

Method easy medium hard low-light 1 low-light 2 

(R_03_easy ) (R_06_medium ) (R_09_hard ) (sequence_4_10 ) (sequence_4_11 )DSO 0.065 0.132 fail 0.640 † fail ORB-SLAM3 (mono) 0.161 fail fail fail fail Kimera-VIO 0.111 0.140 0.113 0.370 0.224 OpenVINS 0.004 0.032 fail fail 0.098 

DPVO 0.065 0.082 0.067 0.814 1.116 DPV-SLAM 0.066 0.082 0.073 1.004 0.973 Table 2: Comparison of different VIO/SLAM methods across various sequences. Metric evaluated is RPE RMSE ↓ (m), computed over the same tracked spans as Table 1. † and fail follow the same convention as Table 1. the RPE stays low across all sequences (local motion is well esti-mated thanks to the IMU), while the ATE grows with trajectory length because there is no mechanism to cancel accumulated er-ror. This is exactly the pattern seen in Table 3, where Kimera-VIO scores high on the local CP@1m metric yet collapses on the global R@5m metric. The natural adaptation for the domain is to enable Kimera’s full SLAM backend with loop closure and pose-graph optimization, so that revisited regions correct the accu-mulated drift that currently limits its global consistency. DPVO and DPV-SLAM are the most robust systems in terms of tracking continuity, never losing tracking despite using nei-ther inertial priors nor hand-crafted features. Their limitation is twofold. First, being monocular and inertial-free, they estimate trajectories only up to scale and lack the metric anchoring that the IMU gives Kimera; this contributes to their reduced accu-racy relative to the successful VIO counterpart, visible in their large ATE on the low-light sequences. Second, as learning-based methods they are subject to a domain gap: their patch-tracking and update networks are trained predominantly on well-exposed imagery, so the severe noise, blur, and low contrast of our low-light sequences fall outside their training distribution, and the global backend of DPV-SLAM only helps when loop closures can actually be recognized under degraded appearance. These methods could be adapted by fine-tuning or augmenting train-ing with low-light and blurred imagery, by prepending a learned enhancement front-end, and by fusing inertial measurements to resolve scale and provide a metric prior. The gap between DPVO and DPV-SLAM in Table 3 also indicates that the loop-closure backend contributes little on these sequences, consistent with appearance-based loop detection struggling in the dark. Finally, the evaluation itself carries limitations. We report only a subset of the LaMARia sequences for computational rea-sons, the low-light degradation in part of the data is synthetic and does not fully model camera exposure adaptation, and the monocular systems are only comparable to the metric ones after a Sim(3) alignment. These caveats should be kept in mind when generalizing the observed rankings to a deployed UGV platform. 

# 7 Conclusions 

This report surveys the background of modern SLAM systems, motivates the problem of low-light navigation for UGVs, and benchmarks six representative SLAM methods on the LaMARia dataset. We relate each method’s performance to the assump-tions underlying its paradigm, and survey algorithmic additions that could improve robustness in low-light conditions. Future work includes implementing the proposed improve-ments within the evaluated SLAM approaches. We also plan to collect a dataset tailored specifically to the UGV domain and covering the problem of reduced illumination. This would en-able a more focused evaluation of modern systems and may sur-face additional challenges in this domain that currently available datasets do not capture. 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was conducted as part of the certification program “Off-Road Visual Navigation: Development and Evaluation of Systems in Challenging Environments” at the Faculty of Ap-plied Sciences, Ukrainian Catholic University, and in collabora-tion with the UCU UGV Club. We express our gratitude to Maksym Zhuk, Anton Vali-hurskyi, and Andrii Kryvyi for their help and support through-out the project. 9References 

Sunil Arya, David M. Mount, Nathan S. Netanyahu, Ruth Sil-verman, and Angela Y. Wu. An optimal algorithm for ap-proximate nearest neighbor searching fixed dimensions. J. ACM , 45(6):891–923, November 1998. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/293347.293348. URL https://doi.org/10. 1145/293347.293348 .Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. Surf: Speeded up robust features. In Aleš Leonardis, Horst Bischof, and Axel Pinz, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2006 , pages 404–417, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-33833-8. Michael Burri, Janosch Nikolic, Pascal Gohl, Thomas Schneider, Joern Rehder, Sammy Omari, Markus W. Achtelik, and Roland Siegwart. The euroc micro aerial vehicle datasets. The Inter-national Journal of Robotics Research , 35(10):1157–1163, 2016. doi: 10.1177/0278364915620033. Cesar Cadena, Luca Carlone, Henry Carrillo, Yasir Latif, Davide Scaramuzza, José Neira, Ian Reid, and John J. Leonard. Past, present, and future of simultaneous localization and map-ping: Toward the robust-perception age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 32(6):1309–1332, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2016. 2624754. Michael Calonder, Vincent Lepetit, Christoph Strecha, and Pas-cal Fua. Brief: Binary robust independent elementary features. In Kostas Daniilidis, Petros Maragos, and Nikos Paragios, ed-itors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2010 , pages 778–792, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-15561-1. Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J. Gómez Rodríguez, José M. M. Montiel, and Juan D. Tardós. Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 37(6):1874–1890, 2021. doi: 10. 1109/TRO.2021.3075644. Tianchen Deng, Yue Pan, Shenghai Yuan, Dong Li, Chen Wang, Mingrui Li, Long Chen, Lihua Xie, Danwei Wang, Jingchuan Wang, Javier Civera, Hesheng Wang, and Weidong Chen. What is the best 3d scene representation for robotics? from geometric to foundation models, 2026. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2512.03422 .Daniel DeTone, Tomasz Malisiewicz, and Andrew Rabinovich. Superpoint: Self-supervised interest point detection and de-scription. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , pages 337–33712, 2018. doi: 10.1109/CVPRW.2018.00060. M.W.M. Gamini Dissanayake, Paul Newman, Steve Clark, Hugh F. Durrant-Whyte, and Michael Csorba. A solution to the simultaneous localization and map building (slam) prob-lem. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation , 17(3):229– 241, 2001. doi: 10.1109/70.938381. Mihai Dusmanu, Ignacio Rocco, Tomas Pajdla, Marc Pollefeys, Josef Sivic, Akihiko Torii, and Torsten Sattler. D2-Net: A Trainable CNN for Joint Detection and Description of Local Features. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2019. Jakob Engel, Vladlen Koltun, and Daniel Cremers. Direct Sparse Odometry . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analy-sis & Machine Intelligence , 40(03):611–625, March 2018. ISSN 1939-3539. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2658577. URL 

https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/ 10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2658577 .Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we ready for autonomous driving? the KITTI vision benchmark suite. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2012. Patrick Geneva, Kevin Eckenhoff, Woosik Lee, Yulin Yang, and Guoquan Huang. Openvins: A research platform for visual-inertial estimation. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4666–4672, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196524. Chunle Guo, Chongyi Li, Jichang Guo, Chen Change Loy, Jun-hui Hou, Sam Kwong, and Runmin Cong. Zero-reference deep curve estimation for low-light image enhancement. CoRR ,abs/2001.06826, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2001.06826 .Xiaojie Guo and Qiming Hu. Low-light image enhancement via breaking down the darkness. Int. J. Comput. Vision ,131(1):48–66, October 2022. ISSN 0920-5691. doi: 10. 1007/s11263-022-01667-9. URL https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11263-022-01667-9 .Peter E. Hart, Nils J. Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. A formal basis for the heuristic determination of minimum cost paths. 

IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics , 4(2): 100–107, 1968. doi: 10.1109/TSSC.1968.300136. Armin Hornung, Kai M. Wurm, Maren Bennewitz, Cyrill Stach-niss, and Wolfram Burgard. Octomap: an efficient prob-abilistic 3d mapping framework based on octrees. Auton. Robots , 34(3):189–206, April 2013. ISSN 0929-5593. doi: 10. 1007/s10514-012-9321-0. URL https://doi.org/10. 1007/s10514-012-9321-0 .Yifan Jiang, Xinyu Gong, Ding Liu, Yu Cheng, Chen Fang, Xi-aohui Shen, Jianchao Yang, Pan Zhou, and Zhangyang Wang. Enlightengan: Deep light enhancement without paired super-vision. CoRR , abs/1906.06972, 2019. URL http://arxiv. org/abs/1906.06972 .R. E. Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Journal of Basic Engineering , 82(1):35–45, 03 1960. ISSN 0021-9223. doi: 10.1115/1.3662552. URL https:// doi.org/10.1115/1.3662552 .Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkuehler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. , 42(4), July 2023. ISSN 0730-0301. doi: 10.1145/3592433. URL https://doi. org/10.1145/3592433 .10 Anusha Krishnan, Shaohui Liu, Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Oscar Gen-tilhomme, David Caruso, Maurizio Monge, Richard New-combe, Jakob Engel, and Marc Pollefeys. Benchmarking ego-centric visual-inertial slam at city scale, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2509.26639 .Steven M. LaValle. Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning. Technical Report TR 98-11, Computer Sci-ence Department, Iowa State University, 1998. Lahav Lipson, Zachary Teed, and Jia Deng. Deep patch visual SLAM. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,2024. Cong Liu, You Wang, Weichao Luo, and Yanhong Peng. Ldfe-slam: Light-aware deep front-end for robust visual slam un-der challenging illumination. Machines , 14(1), 2026. ISSN 2075-1702. doi: 10.3390/machines14010044. URL https: //www.mdpi.com/2075-1702/14/1/44 .David G. Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. Int. J. Comput. Vision , 60(2):91–110, November 2004. ISSN 0920-5691. doi: 10.1023/B:VISI.0000029664.99615. 94. URL https://doi.org/10.1023/B:VISI. 0000029664.99615.94 .Xu Lu, Fujian Yu, Jun Liu, Jurong Chen, and Hanyuan Huang. Lfpd-slam: Visual slam with learning-based features and pseudo-depth. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO) , pages 880–886, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ROBIO66223.2025.11377295. Steve Macenski, Francisco Martin, Ruffin White, and Jonatan Ginés Clavero. The marathon 2: A navigation system. In 

2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 2718–2725, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ IROS45743.2020.9341207. Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul H. J. Kelly, and Andrew J. Davison. Gaussian splatting slam, 2024. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2312.06741 .Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commun. ACM , 65(1):99–106, Decem-ber 2021. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/3503250. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3503250 .Marius Muja and David Lowe. Fast approximate nearest neigh-bors with automatic algorithm configuration. In International Conference on Computer Vision Theory and Applications , vol-ume 1, pages 331–340, 01 2009. Raúl Mur-Artal and Juan D. Tardós. Orb-slam2: An open-source slam system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 33(5):1255–1262, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ TRO.2017.2705103. Raúl Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and Juan D. Tardós. Orb-slam: A versatile and accurate monocular slam system. IEEE Trans-actions on Robotics , 31(5):1147–1163, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TRO. 2015.2463671. Rémi Pautrat, Daniel Barath, Viktor Larsson, Martin R. Oswald, and Marc Pollefeys. Deeplsd: Line segment detection and re-finement with deep image gradients. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR) , pages 17327–17336, June 2023. S.M. Pizer, R.E. Johnston, J.P. Ericksen, B.C. Yankaskas, and K.E. Muller. Contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization: speed and effectiveness. In [1990] Proceedings of the First Con-ference on Visualization in Biomedical Computing , pages 337– 345, 1990. doi: 10.1109/VBC.1990.109340. Antoni Rosinol, Marcus Abate, Yun Chang, and Luca Carlone. Kimera: an open-source library for real-time metric-semantic localization and mapping. In IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2020a. URL https://github.com/ MIT-SPARK/Kimera .Antoni Rosinol, Arjun Gupta, Marcus Abate, Jingnan Shi, and Luca Carlone. 3d dynamic scene graphs: Actionable spa-tial perception with places, objects, and humans. CoRR ,abs/2002.06289, 2020b. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2002.06289 .Edward Rosten and Tom Drummond. Machine learning for high-speed corner detection. In Aleš Leonardis, Horst Bischof, and Axel Pinz, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2006 , pages 430–443, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-33833-8. Ethan Rublee, Vincent Rabaud, Kurt Konolige, and Gary Bradski. Orb: An efficient alternative to sift or surf. In 2011 Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 2564–2571, 2011. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2011.6126544. Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Daniel DeTone, Tomasz Malisiewicz, and Andrew Rabinovich. SuperGlue: Learning feature matching with graph neural networks. In CVPR , 2020. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/1911.11763 .Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Daniel DeTone, Tomasz Malisiewicz, and Andrew Rabinovich. Lightglue: Local feature matching at light speed. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. David Schubert, Thore Goll, Nikolaus Demmel, Vladyslav Usenko, Jorg Stuckler, and Daniel Cremers. The tum vi benchmark for evaluating visual-inertial odometry. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , page 1680–1687. IEEE, October 2018. doi: 10.1109/iros.2018.8593419. URL http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1109/IROS.2018.8593419 .Oriane Siméoni, Huy V. Vo, Maximilian Seitzer, Federico Bal-dassarre, Maxime Oquab, Cijo Jose, Vasil Khalidov, Marc Szafraniec, Seungeun Yi, Michaël Ramamonjisoa, Francisco Massa, Daniel Haziza, Luca Wehrstedt, Jianyuan Wang, Tim-othée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Leonel Sentana, Claire Roberts, Andrea Vedaldi, Jamie Tolan, John Brandt, Camille Couprie, Julien Mairal, Hervé Jégou, Patrick Labatut, and Pi-otr Bojanowski. Dinov3, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2508.10104 .11 Randall Smith, Matthew Self, and Peter Cheeseman. Esti-mating uncertain spatial relationships in robotics. In In-gemar J. Cox and Gordon T. Wilfong, editors, Autonomous Robot Vehicles , pages 167–193. Springer, 1990. doi: 10.1007/ 978-1-4613-8997-2_14. João Carlos Virgolino Soares, Gabriel Fischer Abati, and Claudio Semini. Var-slam: Visual adaptive and robust slam for dy-namic environments. ArXiv , 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2510.16205 .Hauke Strasdat, J.M.M. Montiel, and Andrew J. Davi-son. Visual slam: Why filter? Image and Vi-sion Computing , 30(2):65–77, 2012. ISSN 0262-8856. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2012.02.009. URL 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0262885612000248 .Jürgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram Bur-gard, and Daniel Cremers. A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 573–580, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6385773. Hao Sun, Fenggen Yu, Huiyao Xu, Tao Zhang, and Changqing Zou. Ll-gaussian: Low-light scene reconstruction and en-hancement via gaussian splatting for novel view synthesis. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Mul-timedia , MM ’25, page 4261–4270, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400720352. doi: 10.1145/3746027.3755375. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3746027.3755375 .Jiaming Sun, Zehong Shen, Yuang Wang, Hujun Bao, and Xi-aowei Zhou. LoFTR: Detector-free local feature matching with transformers. CVPR , 2021. Zachary Teed, Lahav Lipson, and Jia Deng. Deep patch visual odometry. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems (NeurIPS) , volume 36, 2023. Sebastian Thrun, Wolfram Burgard, and Dieter Fox. Probabilistic Robotics . MIT Press, 2005. Bill Triggs, Philip F. McLauchlan, Richard I. Hartley, and An-drew W. Fitzgibbon. Bundle adjustment — a modern synthesis. In Bill Triggs, Andrew Zisserman, and Richard Szeliski, edi-tors, Vision Algorithms: Theory and Practice , pages 298–372, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-44480-0. Jianyuan Wang, Minghao Chen, Nikita Karaev, Andrea Vedaldi, Christian Rupprecht, and David Novotny. Vggt: Visual geom-etry grounded transformer, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2503.11651 .Shuzhe Wang, Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, Boris Chidlovskii, and Jerome Revaud. Dust3r: Geometric 3d vision made easy, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14132 .Qing Zhang, Yongwei Nie, and Wei-Shi Zheng. Dual illu-mination estimation for robust exposure correction. CoRR ,abs/1910.13688, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/ 1910.13688 .Xiaoming Zhao, Xingming Wu, Jinyu Miao, Weihai Chen, Peter C. Y. Chen, and Zhengguo Li. Alike: Accurate and lightweight keypoint detection and descriptor extraction. IEEE Transac-tions on Multimedia , 3 2022. doi: 10.1109/TMM.2022.3155927. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.02906 .Xiaoming Zhao, Xingming Wu, Weihai Chen, Peter C. Y. Chen, Qingsong Xu, and Zhengguo Li. Aliked: A lighter keypoint and descriptor extraction network via deformable transfor-mation. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation & Measure-ment , 72:1–16, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3271000. URL 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03608.pdf .Olaya Álvarez Tuñón, Yury Brodskiy, and Erdal Kayacan. Monocular visual simultaneous localization and mapping: (r)evolution from geometry to deep learning-based pipelines. 

IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , 5(5):1990–2010, May 2024. ISSN 2691-4581. doi: 10.1109/tai.2023. 3321032. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAI. 2023.3321032 .12 A SLAM Taxonomy 

Figure 1: Standard modules for SLAM pipeline implementations as outlined in (Álvarez Tuñón et al., 2024) 

# B Additional evaluation 

# B.1 Metrics 

LaMARia (Krishnan et al., 2025) introduces additional metrics that evaluate consistency at surveyed ground-control points and across the broader pose sequence. These evaluation protocols use control points to assess both local accuracy at known loca-tions and global consistency across the trajectory. Each sequence is accompanied by 𝐾 geo-referenced control points {𝐩 𝑘 }𝐾 𝑘=1 ⊂ ℝ 3 whose positions are precisely determined through surveying techniques (e.g., GNSS-RTK measurements). These control points are automatically detected in imagery via fiducial markers. From the estimated trajectory and its keyframe observations, the estimated 3D position ̂ 𝐩 𝑘 of each control point is triangulated by minimizing the reprojection error: 

𝐸 tri = ∑

> 𝑖∈𝑉 (𝑛)

‖‖‖Π (𝐓 −1 𝑖 ⋅̂ 𝐩 𝑘 , 𝐶 𝑖 ) − 𝐩 𝑛 𝑖 

‖‖‖

> 2

,

where Π(⋅) is the camera projection function and 𝑉 (𝑛) indexes the keyframes observing control point 𝑛 . Then this is solved for an optimal Sim (3) transformation 𝑆 ⋆ that aligns the estimated control points with the control points surveyed by robust least-squares optimization, accounting for unknown scale, rotation, and translation. The fraction of control points whose aligned estimates fall within 𝜏 metres of their surveyed positions: 

CP@𝜏 = 1𝐾 

> 𝐾

∑

> 𝑘=1

[‖𝑆 ⋆̂ 𝐩 𝑘 − 𝐩 𝑘 ‖ ≤ 𝜏] . 

We report CP@1 m. Because 𝑆 ⋆ is estimated from the control points themselves, this metric measures local accuracy at sur-veyed locations and is insensitive to trajectory drift in unsur-veyed regions. 

seq. 4_10 seq. 4_11 Method score CP@1m R@5m score CP@1m R@5m Kimera-VIO 100.0 100.0 0.0 94.2 100.0 2.5 OpenVINS 80.8 81.2 0.0 31.3 13.3 41.3 DSO fail fail ORB-SLAM3 fail fail DPVO 72.2 75.0 5.6 36.7 33.3 6.6 DPV-SLAM 34.8 37.5 0.2 32.1 26.7 0.2 

pGT (ceiling) 82.4 100.0 100.0 91.0 100.0 100.0 

Table 3: Control-point and pseudo-GT recall on the two LaMARia sequences with survey control points, after Sim(3) alignment solved from the control points. CP@1m is local ac-curacy at the control points; R@5m is global pose recall. “fail” = fewer than 3 control points triangulated. pGT row is the achiev-able ceiling. As suggested in LaMARia (Krishnan et al., 2025), we compute dense pseudo-ground-truth poses by fusing visual, inertial, and control-point information through joint optimization to evaluate global trajectory consistency. Let {𝐓 pGT 𝑗 }𝐿 𝑗=1 denote the set of 𝐿 

pseudo-ground-truth poses matched (within temporal tolerance) to estimated keyframes. Using the same alignment 𝑆 ⋆ computed from control points, we measure the fraction of poses whose estimated locations align well with pseudo-ground-truth: 

R@𝜏 = 1𝐿 

> 𝐿

∑ 

> 𝑗=1

[‖‖‖trans ((𝑆 ⋆̂ 𝐓 𝑗 )−1 

𝐓 pGT 𝑗 )‖‖‖ ≤ 𝜏 ] ,

where trans(𝐓) extracts the translational component of a trans-formation. We report R@5 m. These two metrics reveal different failure modes of the sys-tems. A trajectory showing high CP@1 m but low R@5 m indi-cates local consistency at surveyed control points with global drift elsewhere. Conversely, uniform scale or orientation errors affect both metrics equally. 

# B.2 Results 

Table 3 reports CP@1 m and R@5 m for the two sequences that carry surveyed control points. Table 4 breaks down the R@5 mdenominator/tolerance choice for the systems that produced a usable estimate. The strict 1 ms full column is deflated by time-grid mismatch alone (Kimera-VIO and DPVO drop to roughly 50–80% coverage), while the looser ∼100 ms cov tolerance re-stores coverage to near 100% with cov ≈ assoc , confirming these systems track the full sequence and that assoc is the fair com-parison figure; OpenVINS is unaffected, as its poses already fully overlap the pGT. 

# C Trajectories 

We visualize the tracked trajectories against ground truth for the 

sequence_4_10 , sequence_4_11 , R_06_medium ,and R_09_hard sequences. OpenVINS demonstrates a catastrophic failure mode on the R_09_hard and 13 seq. 4_10 seq. 4_11 Method assoc full cov cov% assoc full cov cov% Kimera-VIO 0.0 0.0 0.0 99 2.5 0.6 3.1 100 OpenVINS 0.0 0.0 0.0 100 41.3 41.2 41.2 100 DSO fail fail ORB-SLAM3 fail fail DPVO 5.6 2.8 5.5 100 6.6 3.2 6.5 100 DPV-SLAM 0.2 0.1 0.2 100 0.2 0.1 0.2 100         

> pGT (ceiling) 100.0 100.0 100.0 100 100.0 100.0 100.0 100

Table 4: R@5m sensitivity to the matching tolerance. assoc : as-sociated pGT poses at 1 ms. full : full pGT length at 1 ms. cov :full pGT length at ∼100 ms tolerance; cov% is resulting cover-age. See text for interpretation. 

sequence_4_10 datasets, with trajectories that abruptly veer off-map mid-sequence. The method tracks correctly for the first 150–200 meters but then crosses a discrete scale observability threshold at a specific spatial location, after which all subsequent poses are computed in a warped coordinate frame with no recovery mechanism. Direct Sparse Odometry exhibits geometric impossibility on sequences sequence_4_10 and sequence_4_11 . Early depth estimation propagates scale bias throughout the sequence, causing scale to oscillate between over- and under-estimation, which forces camera pose estimates to bounce back and forth, creating topological destruction. OpenVINS on sequence_4_11 weaves perpendicular to the actual path while maintaining good local tracking but accu-mulating large global error. The root cause is anisotropic scale bias: the method estimates forward motion (aligned with dom-inant camera motion) more accurately than lateral motion, cre-ating systematic weaving perpendicular to travel direction. Kimera-VIO maintains topological correctness on all se-quences, staying on-path with only minor jitter and no spirals, with gradual ATE growth. Overall, the method shows a graceful degradation rather than catastrophic failure. Scale observability is the limiting factor for all methods on longer sequences. Once visual odometry incorrectly estimates scale, no mechanism exists to correct it without loop closure or IMU integration, making scale the fundamental constraint de-termining method performance. 

Figure 2: Estimated versus ground-truth trajectories on 

R_06_medium . Accumulated drift grows gradually with tra-jectory length for the odometry-only methods, while Kimera-VIO stays on-path, consistent with the ATE trend in Table 1. 14 Figure 3: Estimated versus ground-truth trajectories on 

R_09_hard . OpenVINS veers off-map after crossing a scale-observability threshold, and the feature-based and direct meth-ods lose tracking, whereas DPVO, DPV-SLAM, and Kimera-VIO follow the full path with varying global drift. Figure 4: Estimated versus ground-truth trajectories on the low-light sequence sequence_4_10 . Under severe illumination degradation OpenVINS diverges into a warped frame and DSO exhibits oscillating scale, while the monocular learning-based methods maintain tracking at the cost of large scale and drift error. 15 Figure 5: Estimated versus ground-truth trajectories on the low-light sequence sequence_4_11 . OpenVINS weaves perpen-dicular to the path due to anisotropic scale bias, illustrating the divergence between local motion accuracy (RPE) and global con-sistency (ATE) discussed in the results. 16